--- PAGE 1 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
1 
The Revised Rules of Court 
 
PART III 
REVISED RULES OF CRIMINAL 
PROCEDURE 
 
RULE 110 – 127  
 
RULES OF COURT 
 
Section 3. Cases governed. — These Rules shall govern 
the procedure to be observed in actions, civil or 
criminal and special proceedings. 
 
(a) A civil action is one by which a party sues another 
for the enforcement or protection of a right, or the 
prevention or redress of a wrong, (1a, R2) 
 
A civil action may either be ordinary or special. Both 
are governed by the rules for ordinary civil actions, 
subject to the specific rules prescribed for a special 
civil action. (n) 
 
(b) A criminal action is one by which the State 
prosecutes a person for an act or omission 
punishable by law. (n) 
 
(c) A special proceeding is a remedy by which a party 
seeks to establish a status, a right, or a particular fact. 
(2a, R2) 
 
Application of Rules of Criminal Procedure 
The rules of criminal procedure are given retroactive 
application insofar as they benefit the accused 
 
Application of other special rules of procedure in 
criminal cases 
1) Child witness examination rule 
2) Electronic device rule 
Q: Are text messages admissible in evidence 
in criminal cases? 
A: Yes 
3) Judicial affidavit rule 
 When the maximum penalty imposable 
does not exceed 6 years, or when the 
accused agrees to the use of judicial 
affidavits irrespective of the penalty 
involved, and with respect to the civil 
aspect of the action 
4) Revised Rules of Procedure in Intellectual 
Property Rights 
5) Revised guidelines on continuous trial in 
criminal cases 
XPN: criminal cases falling under the rules on 
summary procedure 
6) Rules on Cybercrime Warrants 
7) Rules on writ of amparo 
8) Rules of writ of habeas data 
9) Rules of procedure in environmental cases  
 
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 
 
Sources of Rules on Criminal Procedure (Tan) 
1) 1987 Philippine Constitution 
2) Rule 110 – 127 of the Revised Rules of 
Criminal Procedure 
3) Other laws 
4) Provisions of Civil Code (Arts 32, 33, 34 and 
2176) 
5) Provisions of the RPC (Art 2, 100 and 125) 
6) Manual of prosecutors 
7) DOJ circulars 
8) Administrative Memorandums 
 
CRIMINAL LITIGATION PROCESS 
 
Laws relating to the criminal litigation process 
1) Rule 110 – 127 of the Revised Rules of 
Criminal Procedure 
2) Issuances or circulars released by the SC which 
supplements, amend or modify the Rules of 
Court 
 
PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS 
Commission of a crime 
The criminal litigation process presupposes that 
there is a crime that has been committed or there 
is alleged to be committed. Otherwise, if there is no 
crime the process will not begin in the first place. 
 
Commencement of the application of criminal 
procedure  
The application of the criminal procedure will not be 
triggered by the commission of the crime or the 
allegation of a crime, there must be contact with the 
law.  
 
Contact with the law 
It is that phase after the commission of the crime 
where the criminal act is brought to the attention of the 
authorities and the offender is arrested either by a 
duly issued warrant or a valid warrantless arrest. It 
triggers the criminal litigation process. 
 
Other ways in coming in contact with the law 
1) Valid arrest with a warrant 
2) Valid search with a warrant 
3) Search and seizure conducted without a 
warrant under recognized exceptions to the 
general rule  
4) In instances covered by the Katarungang 
Pambarangay Law under the Local 
Government Code 
 
Institution of the criminal action; preliminary 
investigation 
Preliminary investigation - is an inquiry aimed 
whether a crime has been committed, whether the 
person complained of is probably guilty thereof and 
hence, must be held for trial. It is aimed in finding 
probable cause to charge the respondent in court. Up 

--- PAGE 2 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
2 
until this point all these processes under the criminal 
litigation process are conducted by the executive 
branch of the government (police, enforcement 
officers, private persons). 
 
  It is only when a criminal information is filed 
in court that a criminal case is already brought 
to the judicial system. It is now the court which 
has the exclusive jurisdiction or power to 
dispose of the criminal case 
 
Duty of the court upon filing of the complaint or 
information 
1) Not yet arrested – to determine whether there 
is probable cause to issue a warrant of arrest 
2) Already arrested – issue a commitment 
order 
 
Availment of provisional remedies 
After the filing of the information or the complaint, the 
party may avail provisional remedies such as 
preliminary attachment, injunction, and temporary 
restraining order. 
 
Bail 
Bail may be availed before or after the filing of an 
information or complaint in court. A person under the 
custody of law may file or apply for bail before or after 
he is formally charged criminally. Bail is a constitutional 
right and granted for temporary liberty. 
 
Arraignment 
Whether or not the accused is under detention or out 
of bail, the court shall thereafter set the case for 
arraignment.  
 
Arraignment - is the formal mode and manner of 
implementing the constitutional right of an accused to 
be informed of the nature and cause of the accusations 
against him. Without arraignment, the accused is not 
deemed to have been informed of such accusation. It 
will be a violation of his right to be informed. 
 
Pre-trial 
During pre-trial and cases where it is allowed to be 
settled, the court usually issue an order that it will go to 
the mediation before it will continue. But in most of 
the cases that are not covered by the court annex 
mediation, then it will proceed to pre-trial where they 
will discuss plea bargaining, stipulation of facts, 
marking of evidence, waiver of objections to 
admissibility, possible modification of the order of 
trial, and such other matters that will promote a fair 
and expeditious trial of the criminal and civil aspect. If 
there was no reservation on the filing of a separate 
civil action, then the civil action ex delicto is 
deemed instituted in the criminal case. 
 
Trial  
The result of the pretrial conference shall control the 
proceedings during trial. Within thirty days from the 
receipt of the pre-trial order, trial shall commence.  
1) The state is first to present evidence.  
2) The accused in a proper case may opt to file a 
demurrer of evidence on the ground of 
insufficiency of evidence.  
Demurrer of evidence – that the state failed 
to present evidence that prove beyond 
reasonable doubt that the elements of a crime 
are present. 
3) If there is no demurrer, it is the time the 
accused presents his evidence. 
4) If there is a reverse trial order, when the 
accused has evidence of exempting 
circumstances, it will be the defense who will 
show first the evidence 
5) In any case, when both parties have already 
presented, the Court may allow the parties to 
present additional evidence for rebuttal 
6) Judgment will follow 
 
Judgment 
A judgment is the adjudication by the court on the guilt 
or innocence of the accused and the imposition of the 
penalty.  
GR: The judgment must be promulgated by reading it 
in the presence of the accused and any judge in which 
it was rendered 
XPN: Unless it is for a light offense, in which case 
judgment may be pronounced in the presence of the 
accused’s counsel or representative. 
 
Post-judgment remedies 
The person convicted is allowed by the Rules of Court 
certain remedies to modify or reverse the judgment of 
conviction within the period to appeal. Under existing 
law, the period to appeal is within 15 days from notice 
of the judgment or final order. Within the same period, 
the court may at its own discretion or upon motion of 
the accused reopen the hearing to avoid miscarriage of 
justice. The accused may also move for a 
reconsideration or new trial.  
 
Otherwise, if the accused has no further action, the 
conviction will become final and judgment will be 
entered. It will be passed back to the executive branch 
for the execution of penalty. 
 
Entry of judgment 
When all remedies have been exhausted and the 
judgement has become final, the same shall be entered 
in accordance with existing rules. 
 
BASIC CONCEPTS 


--- PAGE 3 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
3 
Criminal procedure - Defined as the rules of law 
governing the procedures by which crimes are 
investigated, prosecuted, adjudicated and punished 
 
Procedural law as applied to criminal law provides or 
regulates the steps by which one who committed the 
crime is to be punish. (People v. Lacson) 
 
Criminal law v. criminal procedure 
Criminal law  Criminal procedure 
Substantive law Procedural law 
Defines crimes, treats of 
its nature, and provides 
for its penalties 
Provides for how crimes 
are investigated, 
prosecuted, adjudicated 
and punished 
Statutes imposing 
penalty, fine and 
punishment for certain 
offenses of a public 
nature or wrongs 
committed against the 
state 
Network of laws and 
rules which governs the 
procedural 
administration of 
criminal justice 
 
The ultimate goal of criminal procedure 
It is not to send people to jail, but to do justice. 
Criminal procedure has the imposing task of balancing 
clashing societal interest primarily between those of the 
government or the state and those of the individual. 
 
Criminal procedure, therefore, has an ultimate goal of 
harmonizing the governmental functions of 
maintaining peace and order and protecting 
constitutional rights of its citizens. 
 
Criminal provisions also make sure to limit the 
immense power of the state only up to the point that 
the state won’t violate the constitutional rights of the 
individuals  
 
Construction of the Rules of Court 
Section 6. Construction. — These Rules shall be 
liberally construed in order to promote their 
objective of securing a just, speedy and inexpensive 
disposition of every action and proceeding. (2a) 
 
In dubio pro reo – when there is doubt, the case should 
be resolved in favor of the accused 
 
Since the appeal involves criminal cases, and the 
possibility of a person being deprived of liberty due 
to a procedural lapse militates against the Court’s 
dispensation of justice, the Court grants petitioner’s 
plea for a relaxation of the Rules. For rules of 
procedure must be viewed as tools to facilitate the 
attainment of justice, such that any rigid and 
strict application thereof which results in 
technicalities tending to frustrate substantial 
justice must always be avoided. (Cariaga v. 
People) 
 
Nature of criminal procedure 
The system of criminal procedure in our jurisdiction is 
accusatorial or adversarial in contrast with the 
inquisitorial system of procedure. 
 
As a general rule a court proceeding in our judicial 
set-up is accusatorial or adversary and not 
inquisitorial in nature. It contemplates two 
contending parties before the court, which hears 
them impartially and renders judgment only after 
trial. This basic philosophy would be violated if a 
judge were permitted to act as inquisitor, pursue his 
own independent investigation, arrive at a 
conclusion ex-parte, and then summon the party 
affected so as to enable him, if that were still 
possible, to show that the conclusion thus arrived at 
is without justification. (Queto v. Catolico) 
 
Adversarial v. inquisitorial system 
Accusatorial system Inquisitorial system 
The role of the judge is 
passive; he will only rely 
largely on the evidence 
presented by both sides 
and will render to acquit 
of convict; he may seek 
clarificatory questions 
The role of the judge is 
active and is not limited 
to the evidence 
presented before him; 
he is allowed to actively 
question the accused or 
witness  
The counsel is active The counsel is passive; 
the most they can do is 
to object against the 
constitutional rights of 
their clients 
 
JURISDICTION 
 
Jurisdiction – defined as the power of the court to 
hear and decide cases and to execute judgment thereon. 
 
When should the issues of jurisdiction be raised? 
Jurisdiction can be raised at any stage of the 
proceedings, even on appeal, and is not lost by waiver 
or estoppel. 
 
To whom is it vested? 
It is vested in the court and not the judge 
 
What law should be applied to determine 
jurisdiction in connection with the commission of 
the crime? 
Jurisdiction being a matter of substantive law, the 
established rule is that the statute in force at the time 
of the commencement of the action determines 
the jurisdiction of the court.  
 
Classification of jurisdiction 
1) General – The power of the court to adjudicate 
all controversies except those expressly 
withheld from the plenary powers of the court. 
It extends to all controversies which may be 
brought before a court within the legal bounds 
of rights and remedies 
2) Special or limited – one which restricts the 
court’s jurisdiction only to particular cases and 

--- PAGE 4 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
4 
subject to such limitations as may be provided 
by the governing law. 
3) Original – The power of the court to take 
judicial cognizance of a case instituted for 
judicial action for the first time under the 
conditions provided by the law 
4) Exclusive – the power to adjudicate a case or 
proceeding to the exclusion of all other courts 
at that stage 
5) Exclusive original – the power of the court to 
take judicial cognizance of a case instituted for 
judicial action for the first time under the 
conditions provided by the law, and to the 
exclusion of other all other courts 
6) Appellate – The power and authority conferred 
upon a superior court to rehear and determine 
causes which have been tried in lower courts, 
the cognizance which a superior court takes of 
a case removed to it, by appeal or a writ of 
error, from the decision of a lower court, or the 
review by a superior court of the final judgment 
or order of some lower courts 
7) Concurrent – (confluent or coordinate 
jurisdiction), the power conferred upon 
different courts, whether of the same or 
different ranks, to take cognizance at the same 
stage of the same case in the same or different 
judicial territories.  
8) Delegated 
9) Territorial 
 
 
REQUISITES FOR THE EXERCISE OF 
CRIMINAL JURISDICTION 
 
Criminal Jurisdiction- power and authority to hear 
and try a particular offense and impose the punishment 
for it (Antiporda Jr v. Garchitorena) 
 
REVIEW: 
Due process in criminal proceedings: 
1) That the court or tribunal trying the case is 
properly clothed with judicial power to hear 
and determine the matter before it. (Court of 
competent jurisdiction) 
2) That jurisdiction is lawfully acquired by it over 
the person of the accused. (Within authority 
and proceeded against the orderly process 
of the law) 
3) That the accused is given the opportunity to be 
heard and the judgment is rendered upon 
lawful hearing (notice and hearing) 
 
3 Matters of Jurisdiction 
1) The court must be clothed with proper 
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the 
offense charged 
2) The court must have validly acquired 
jurisdiction over the person of the accused 
either by warrant of arrest or voluntary 
submission 
3) The court must have jurisdiction over the place 
or territory where the crime is committed 
 
Beyond the pale of disagreement is the legal tenet 
that a court acquires jurisdiction to try a criminal 
case only when the following requisites concur:   
1) the offense is one which the court is by law 
authorized to take cognizance of, 
(Jurisdiction over the subject matter) 
2) the offense must have been committed 
within its territorial jurisdiction, and 
(Jurisdiction over the territory) 
3) the person charged with the offense must 
have been brought in to its forum for trial, 
forcibly by warrant of arrest or upon his 
voluntary submission to the court. 
(Jurisdiction over the person of the 
accused) 
(Antiporda Jr v. Garchitorena) 
 
 The concurrence of all of the 3 matters is 
essential in order for the court to proceed 
to exercise its jurisdiction 
 
Being a civil liability arising from the offense 
charged, the governing law is the Rules of Criminal 
Procedure, not the civil procedure rules which 
pertain to civil action arising from the initiatory 
pleading that gives rise to the suit. (Cruz v. CA) 
 
Criminal jurisdiction over the subject matter 
Jurisdiction over the subject matter – power to hear 
and determine the general class to which the 
proceedings in question belong 
 
Two-pronged process 
1) How the criminal jurisdiction is conferred 
 A question of law 
 Not procedural but substantive 
 Purports that there must be a law 
which grants a particular court/s 
the jurisdiction to try a specific crime 
or case. Provisions of the law must 
be inquired into. 
 If a court has no subject matter 
jurisdiction then it has no power or 
authority to hear or to determine the 
issues or the facts and the law 
pertaining to that particular case. Any 
judgment, order, or resolution, which 
was issued by that particular court will 
be considered void and cannot be 
given effect. 
 
Other concepts of subject matter 
jurisdiction 
 It cannot be conferred by 
consent or acquiescence 
 It cannot be acquired through 
waiver or enlarged by omission 
of the parties 
 It is conferred by law 

--- PAGE 5 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
5 
2) How the subject matter jurisdiction is to be 
determined 
 For the court to determine whether it 
has jurisdiction, it must look into the 
allegations of the written accusation for 
it to know whether or not the offense 
charged therein is within its jurisdiction 
as conferred by law. 
 
What it the remedy of the accused if the court has 
no jurisdiction over the subject matter of the 
offense? 
It shall be a ground for a motion to quash under Sec 
3, Rule 117 and the case will be dismissed 
 
Case law has it that in order to determine the 
jurisdiction of the court in criminal cases, the 
complaint or Information must be examined for the 
purpose of ascertaining whether or not the facts set 
out therein and the prescribed period provided for 
by law are within the jurisdiction of the court, and 
where the said Information or complaint is filed. It 
is settled that the jurisdiction of the court in 
criminal cases is determined by the allegations 
of the complaint or Information and not by the 
findings based on the evidence of the court after 
trial. Jurisdiction is conferred only by the 
Constitution or by the law in force at the time of 
the filing of the Information or complaint. Once 
jurisdiction is vested in the court, it is retained up to 
the end of the litigation. (Mobilia Products v. 
Umezawa) 
 
Principle of adherence to jurisdiction or 
continuing jurisdiction 
Concept   
Where a court has already obtained and is exercising 
jurisdiction over a controversy, its jurisdiction to 
proceed to the final determination of the cause is not 
affected by new legislation placing jurisdiction over 
such proceedings in another tribunal unless the 
statute expressly provides, or is construed to the 
effect that it is intended to operate on actions 
pending before its enactment.  
 
Indeed, R.A. No. 7691 contains retroactive 
provisions. However, these only apply to civil cases 
that have not yet reached the pre-trial stage. Neither 
from an express proviso nor by implication can 
it be construed that R.A. No. 7691 has 
retroactive application to criminal cases 
pending or decided by the Regional Trial Courts 
prior to its effectivity. The jurisdiction of the RTC 
over the case attached upon the commencement of 
the action by the filing of the Information and could 
not be ousted by the passage of R.A. No. 7691 
reapportioning the jurisdiction of inferior courts, the 
application of which to criminal cases is prospective 
in nature (Palana v. People) 
 
 The jurisdiction of the court is referred to as 
continuing in view of the general principle that 
once a court has acquired jurisdiction, that 
jurisdiction continues until the court has done 
all that it can to do in the exercise of that 
jurisdiction 
 
XPNs:  
1) Statute expressly provides  
2) Statute is construed to the effect that it is 
intended to operate on actions pending before 
its enactment 
 
Criminal jurisdiction over the territory 
Territorial jurisdiction - in criminal cases, is the 
territory, where the court has jurisdiction to take 
cognizance or to try the offense allegedly committed 
therein by the accused. 
 
How is the territorial jurisdiction of the court 
determined? 
1) Geographical limits of the territory over which 
it presides 
2) The actions it is empowered to hear and decide 
 
The place where the crime was committed 
determines not only the venue of the action but is an 
essential element of jurisdiction. It is a 
fundamental rule that for jurisdiction to be 
acquired by courts in criminal cases, the offense 
should have been committed or any one of its 
essential ingredients should have taken place 
within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. 
Territorial jurisdiction in criminal cases is the 
territory where the court has jurisdiction to take 
cognizance or to try the offense allegedly committed 
therein by the accused. Thus, it cannot take 
jurisdiction over a person charged with an offense 
allegedly committed outside of that limited territory. 
Furthermore, the jurisdiction of a court over the 
criminal case is determined by the allegations in the 
complaint or information. And once it is so shown, 
the court may validly take cognizance of the case. 
However, if the evidence adduced during the 
trial shows that the offense was committed 
somewhere else, the court should dismiss the 
action for want of jurisdiction. (Treñas v. People) 
 
Territorial jurisdiction Subject matter 
jurisdiction 
Principle of adherence 
to jurisdiction cannot be 
applied 
Principle of adherence 
to jurisdiction can be 
applied 
 
What it the remedy of the accused if the court has 
no jurisdiction over the subject matter of the 
offense? 
It shall be a ground for a motion to quash under Sec 
3, Rule 117 and the case will be dismissed 
 
Criminal jurisdiction over the person of the 
accused 
 How jurisdiction over the person of the accused 
acquired 
[A]n accused cannot seek any judicial relief if he does 
not submit his person to the jurisdiction of the court. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
6 
Jurisdiction over the person of the accused may be 
acquired either through compulsory process, 
such as warrant of arrest, or through his voluntary 
appearance, such as when he surrenders to the 
police or to the court. It is only when the court has 
already acquired jurisdiction over his person that an 
accused may invoke the processes of the court 
(Miranda v. Tuliao) 
 
 It is a settled doctrine that jurisdiction over the 
person of the accused is acquired upon the  
1) arrest or apprehension with or without 
warrant or  
2) his voluntary appearance or submission to 
the jurisdiction of the court. 
 Either by himself or with a counsel 
 GR: It is when the accused asks for 
affirmative relief from the court 
o Filing of a motion to quash 
o Filing motion for dismissal 
o Filing of motion for the 
determination of probable 
cause 
o Accused enters into a counsel-
assisted plea and actively 
participates in the trial and 
presents evidence 
XPN: If precisely the seeking of the 
affirmative relief is through 
questioning the jurisdiction of the 
court, then that will no longer be 
deemed as a voluntary submission to 
the jurisdiction of the court. 
 
Where the appearance is by motion 
for the purpose of objecting to the 
jurisdiction of the court over the 
person, it must be for the sole and 
separate purpose of objecting to the 
jurisdiction. If the appearance is for 
any other purpose, the defendant is 
deemed to have voluntarily 
submitted himself to the jurisdiction 
of the court. Such appearance gives 
the court jurisdiction over the 
person of the accused. (Cojuangco v. Sandiganbayan) 
 
Custody of law v jurisdiction over the person of the 
accused 
 Being in custody of the law is not 
necessarily being under jurisdiction of 
the court. 
Custody of the law is required before the court can 
act upon the application for bail, but is not required 
for the adjudication of other reliefs sought by 
the defendant where the mere application 
therefor constitutes a waiver of the defense of 
lack of jurisdiction over the person of the 
accused. (Miranda v. Tuliao) 
 
Custody of the law Jurisdiction over the 
person of the accused 
Signifies restraint on the 
person, who is thereby 
deprived of his own will 
and liberty, binding him 
to become obedient to 
the will of the law 
Acquired compulsorily 
(arrest) or voluntarily 
(voluntary submission) 
Custody over the body 
of the accused 
Jurisdiction over the 
person of the accused 
A person applying for 
admission to bail must 
be in the custody of the 
law or otherwise 
deprived of his liberty. 
A person applying for 
admission to bail does 
not necessarily have to 
be already within the 
jurisdiction of the Court 
 
What it the remedy of the accused if the court has 
no jurisdiction over theperson? 
It shall be a ground for a motion to quash under Sec 
3, Rule 117 and the case will be dismissed 
 
OBJECTIONS ON JURISDICTIONAL 
GROUNDS 
Jurisdiction over the subject matter 
GR: When an objection is based on the ground that 
the courts lack jurisdiction over the subject matter, 
such objection may be raised or considered motu 
proprio by the court on its own discretion at any 
stage of the proceedings and even on the appeal.  
 
XPN: The party may be estopped for reasons of 
public policy as when he initially invokes the 
jurisdiction of the court and then later on repudiates 
that same jurisdiction. This is a limited exception. 
(Tijam v. Sibonghanoy) 
 
Rules on estoppel on the question of jurisdiction 
 The operation of the principle of estoppel 
on the question of jurisdiction seemingly depends 
upon whether the lower court actually had 
jurisdiction or not.  
 
1) If it had no jurisdiction, but the case was 
tried and decided upon the theory that it had 
jurisdiction, the parties are not barred, on 
appeal, from assailing such jurisdiction, for 
the same must exist as a matter of law and 
may not be conferred by consent of the 
parties or by estoppel.  
 
2) However, if the lower court had jurisdiction, 
and the case was heard and decided upon a 
given theory, such, for instance, as that the 
court had no jurisdiction, the party who 
induced it to adopt such theory will not 
be permitted, on appeal, to assume an 
inconsistent position - that the lower 
court had jurisdiction. Here, the principle 
of estoppel applies.  
 
 The rule that jurisdiction is conferred by law 
and does not depend upon the will of the parties, 
has no bearing thereon. (Cabrera v. Clarin, 
citing Tijam v. Sibonghanoy) 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
7 
Jurisdiction of the person of the accused 
GR: Acts seeking affirmative relief would 
constitute the voluntary appearance or 
submission to the jurisdiction of the court. 
XPN: Making a special appearance to the court 
to question the jurisdiction of the court over the 
person of the accused is not considered a 
voluntary submission to the jurisdiction of the 
court 
 
INJUNCTION 
Injunction – putting a stop to or preventing criminal 
prosecution 
 Injunction will not lie to enjoin a 
criminal prosecution 
RATIONALE: Public interest 
requires that criminal acts be 
immediately investigated and 
prosecuted for the protection of 
society 
 
GR: Injunction will not be granted to restrain 
criminal prosecution since public interest 
requires the criminal acts be immediately 
investigated and prosecuted for the protection of 
society. 
 
XPNs:  
1) When the injunction is necessary to afford 
adequate protection to the constitutional 
rights of the accused 
2) When it is necessary for the orderly 
administration of justice or to avoid 
oppression or multiplicity of actions 
3) When there is a prejudicial question 
which is subjudice 
4) When the acts of the officer are without or 
in excess of authority 
5) Where the prosecution is under an invalid 
law, ordinance or regulation 
6) When double jeopardy is clearly apparent 
7) Where the court has no jurisdiction over 
the offense 
8) When it is a case of persecution rather 
than prosecution* 
9) When the charges are manifestly false and 
motivated by lust for vengeance 
10) When there is clearly no prima facie case 
against the accused and a motion to 
quash on that ground has been denied 
*the careless inclusion of a person in the warrant of arrest is an 
act of persecution rather than prosecution 
 
MANDAMUS 
Mandamus - for one to demand or compel a public 
officer to do his job or duty that is prescribed by law 
 a remedial measure for parties 
aggrieved which shall be issued when 
any tribunal, corporation, board, 
officer, or person unlawfully neglects a 
performance of an act which the law 
specifically enjoins as a duty resulting 
from an office, a trust, or station 
 is the relief sought "[w]hen any 
tribunal corporation, board, officer 
or person unlawfully neglects the 
performance of an act which the law 
specifically enjoins as a duty 
resulting from an office, trust, or 
station," and "there is no other 
plain, speedy and adequate remedy 
in the ordinary course of law." 
 
GR: Mandamus cannot be resorted to in order to 
compel a criminal prosecution 
 
XPN: After determination of probable cause, it 
becomes the mandatory duty of the prosecutor to 
file the case before the court. Otherwise, the non-
filing of the criminal case despite the finding of 
probable cause will be considered a grave abuse of 
discretion or a deliberate refusal to perform a duty 
enjoined by law by the prosecutor and therefore, a 
proper case for mandamus 
 
COURTS 
Functions of court 
1) Decide actual controversies and not to give 
opinions upon abstract propositions 
2) Apply the law 
3) Interpret the law 
 
Classification of courts 
As to jurisdiction 
1) Collegiate Courts (Sandiganbayan, Court of 
Appeals, Court of Tax Appeals and Supreme 
Court) – those with multiple judges sitting in 
the court  
 their jurisdiction covers the entire 
Philippines (whatever is covered by 
territory of the Philippines) 
2) Trial Courts, First Level Courts, Municipal 
Trial Courts, Metropolitan Trial Courts, 
Municipal Trial Courts and Regional Trial 
Courts – specific and limited judicial regions 
over which they have jurisdiction 
 
As to functions 
1) Regular courts 
 Supreme court 
 Court of appeals 
 Regional trial courts 
 Metropolitan trial courts, municipal 
trial courts in cities, municipal trial 
courts, municipal circuit trial courts 
 
2) Special courts 
 Sandiganbayan 
 Court of tax appeals 
 Shari’a district courts, shari’a circual 
courts 
 
Rule of thumb on original jurisdiction of courts 
1) Determine whether a particular case is under 
the jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan  

--- PAGE 8 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
8 
2) Determine whether a particular case is under 
the jurisdiction of Special Regional Trial Courts 
or Special Courts (Family Courts, Dangerous 
Drugs Act Courts, Intellectual Property Courts 
or Commercial Courts) 
3) If not proceed to look at regular courts in the 
following order:  
a) MTC, MTCC, MCTC - the first level 
courts  
b) RTC - that is not designated as a special 
court. It is called a catch all court 
because if a criminal case does not fall 
within the original jurisdiction of any 
other court, then it will be the regular 
RTC that will have jurisdiction over it 
 
Original jurisdiction of Sandiganbayan 
 PD 1606 
 RA 795 – Amended PD 1606 
 RA 8249 
 RA 10660 
 
1+1=2 METHOD 
Rules 
1) First, determine whether or not the subject 
crime is that covered under or listed under the 
Sandiganbayan Law or is a special criminal law 
which states that it is the Sandiganbayan which 
has original jurisdiction. 
2) Second, list down on the second column all the 
persons covered by the Sandiganbayan Law. 
 
If both rules are satisfied (1+1=2), then the 
Sandiganbayan has jurisdiction over the case 
 
RA 10660 
Section 2. Section 4 of the same decree, as amended, 
is hereby further amended to read as follows: 
"SEC. 4. Jurisdiction. – The Sandiganbayan shall 
exercise exclusive original jurisdiction in all cases 
involving: 
a) Violations of Republic Act No. 3019, as 
amended, otherwise known as the Anti-
Graft and Corrupt Practices Act, Republic 
Act No. 1379, and Chapter II, Section 2, 
Title VII, Book II of the Revised Penal 
Code, where one or more of the accused are 
officials occupying the following positions in 
the government, whether in a permanent, 
acting or interim capacity, at the time of the 
commission of the offense: 
1) Officials of the executive branch 
occupying the positions of regional 
director and higher, otherwise classified 
as Grade ’27’ and higher, of the 
Compensation and Position 
Classification Act of 1989 (Republic Act 
No. 6758), specifically including: 
A) Provincial governors, vice-
governors, members of the 
sangguniang panlalawigan, and 
provincial treasurers, assessors, 
engineers, and other provincial 
department heads: 
B) City mayors, vice-mayors, members 
of the sangguniang panlungsod, city 
treasurers, assessors, engineers, and 
other city department heads; 
C) Officials of the diplomatic service 
occupying the position of consul and 
higher; 
D) Philippine army and air force 
colonels, naval captains, and all 
officers of higher rank; 
E) Officers of the Philippine National 
Police while occupying the position 
of provincial director and those 
holding the rank of senior 
superintendent and higher; 
F) City and provincial prosecutors and 
their assistants, and officials and 
prosecutors in the Office of the 
Ombudsman and special prosecutor; 
G) Presidents, directors or trustees, or 
managers of government-owned or 
controlled corporations, state 
universities or educational 
institutions or foundations. 
 
2) Members of Congress and officials 
thereof classified as Grade ’27’ and 
higher under the Compensation and 
Position Classification Act of 1989; 
3) Members of the judiciary without 
prejudice to the provisions of the 
Constitution; 
4) Chairmen and members of the 
Constitutional Commissions, without 
prejudice to the provisions of the 
Constitution; and 
5) All other national and local officials 
classified as Grade ’27’ and higher under 
the Compensation and Position 
Classification Act of 1989. 
b) Other offenses or felonies whether simple or 
complexed with other crimes committed by 
the public officials and employees 
mentioned in subsection a. of this section in 
relation to their office. 
c) Civil and criminal cases filed pursuant to and 
in connection with Executive Order Nos. 1, 
2, 14 and 14-A, issued in 1986. 
 
Provided, That the Regional Trial Court shall have 
exclusive original jurisdiction where the information: 
(a) does not allege any damage to the 
government or any bribery; or (b) alleges 
damage to the government or bribery arising 
from the same or closely related transactions or 
acts in an amount not exceeding One million 
pesos (P1,000,000.00) 
 
 After RA 10660 Before 10660 
Date May 1, 2015 and 
onwards  
Before May 1, 
2015 
As to the 
threshold (column 
1) 
Introduced a 
threshold amount 
(1M) of the 
damage to the 
No threshold 
needed 

--- PAGE 9 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
9 
government or to 
the amount 
involved in the 
bribery for it to 
come under the 
jurisdiction of the 
Sandiganbayan 
As to the salary 
grade in those 
positions 
specifically 
provided by law in 
column 2  
Limited category 2 
in the sense that 
most of the 
officers and 
employees should 
be SG 27 or 
higher 
No limitation as to 
salary grade 
 
Column 1 (cases which are under the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan)  
1) Violations of Republic Act No. 3019, as 
amended, otherwise known as the Anti-Graft 
and Corrupt Practices Act  
2) Violations against Republic Act No. 1379, or 
an Act declaring Forfeiture in favor of the State 
any property found to have been unlawfully 
acquired by any public officer or employee and 
providing for the proceedings therefor 
3) Crimes committed by public officers under the 
RPC, Chapter 2, Sec. 2, Title VII of Book 2. 
We have Article 210 – Direct Bribery, Article 
211 – Indirect Bribery, Article 211-A – 
Qualified Bribery, and Article 212 – 
Corruption of Public Officials.  
4) Other offenses or felonies, whether simple or 
complexed with other crimes, committed by 
the public officials and employees which are 
subject to the jurisdiction of Sandiganbayan. 
This is a catch-all provision which covers all 
other felonies or crimes which may not 
necessarily be covered by the Sandiganbayan 
Law but because the crime is committed by a 
public officer or employee in relation to 
his/her office 
 
An offense may be considered as committed in 
relation to the office if:  
1) it cannot exist without the office; or  
2) if the office is a constituent element of the 
crime as defined in the statute, such as, for 
instance, the crimes defined and punished in 
Chapter Two to Six, Title Seven, of the Revised 
Penal Code; 
3) the offense must be intimately connected 
with the office of the offender; and  
4) the fact that the offense was committed in 
relation to the office must be alleged in the 
information 
 
This Court had ruled that as long as the offense 
charged in the information is intimately connected 
with the office and is alleged to have been 
perpetrated while the accused was in the 
performance, though improper or irregular, of his 
official functions, there being no personal motive to 
commit the crime and had the accused not have 
committed it had he not held the aforesaid office, 
the accused is held to have been indicted for "an 
offense committed in relation" to his office. (People v. Sandiganbayan) 
 
Rule 
1) Crimes which may be committed even if not a 
public official - requirement of alleging 
specifically in the information or in the 
complaint that a particular crime is committed 
in relation his office  
2) Crimes which have for their constituent 
element ‘public office’ as provided in the 
statute defining it - no need for the 
information to state that specific factual 
allegations of the intimacy between the office 
and the crime charged or the accused 
committed the crime in the performance of his 
duties. 
 
From the allegations of the information it does 
not appear that the official positions of the 
accused were connected with the offenses 
charged. In fact, the attorneys for the prosecution 
of stated that the motives for the crimes were 
"personal with political character." It does not even 
appear, nor is there assertion, that the crimes were 
committed by the defendants in line of duty or in the 
performance of their official functions. 
 
Public office is not of the essence of murder. The 
taking of human life is either murder or homicide 
whether done by a private citizen or public servant, 
and the penalty is the same except when the 
perpetrator, being a public functionary, took 
advantage of his office, as alleged in this case, in 
which event the penalty is increased. 
 
But the use or abuse of office does not adhere to the 
crime as an element; and even as an aggravating 
circumstance, its materiality arises, not from the 
allegations but on the proof, not from the fact that 
the criminals are public officials but from the 
manner of the commission of the crime. 
 
Incidentally, this might serve as a warning 
against disqualifying a lawyer legislator on the 
basis of what is alleged and not on the nature of 
the offense itself. Where the petitioners' 
proposition sustained, the result would be that in 
every case in which the accused is a public officer or 
employee, the prosecution could at will keep a 
member of Congress from entering an appearance 
as attorney for the defense. The prosecutor could do 
this by the simple expedient of making the necessary 
averments, even though, as a matter of fact, there 
was no evidence that the office held by the 
defendant had anything to do with the offense. 
 
By the same token, the fact that, as alleged, the 
defendants made use of firearms which they were 
authorized to carry or possess by reason of their 
positions, could not supply the required connection 
between the office and the crime. Firearms however 
and wherever obtained are not an ingredient of 
murder or homicide. The crime in question, for 

--- PAGE 10 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
10 
example, could have been committed by the 
defendants in the same or like manner and with the 
same case if they had been private individuals and 
fired with unlicensed weapons. Murders or 
homicides by private persons with guns, licensed or 
unlicensed are the general rule and by public officers 
the exception. (Montilla v. Hilario) 
 
XPN: 
It is apparent from these allegations that, although 
public office is not an element of the crime of 
murder in abstract, as committed by the main 
respondents herein, according to the amended 
information, the offense therein charged is 
intimately connected with their respective offices 
and was perpetrated while they were in the 
performance, though improper or irregular, of their 
official functions. Indeed, they had no personal 
motive to commit the crime and they would not 
have committed it had they not held their 
aforesaid offices. The co-defendants of respondent 
Leroy S. Brown, obeyed his instructions because he 
was their superior officer, as Mayor of Basilan City. 
(People v. Montejo) 
 
In People v. Montejo, we ruled that an offense is said to 
have been committed in relation to the office if the 
offense is "intimately connected" with the office of 
the offender and perpetrated while he was in the 
performance of his official functions. This intimate 
relation between the offense charged and the 
discharge of official duties must be alleged in the 
Information. This is in accordance with the rule that 
the factor that characterizes the charge is the actual 
recital of the facts in the complaint or information. 
Hence, where the information is wanting in specific 
factual averments to show the intimate 
relationship/connection between the offense 
charged and the discharge of official functions, the 
Sandiganbayan has no jurisdiction over the case.  
 
xxBut he imposed a condition before extending such 
recommendation - she should be his girlfriend and 
must report daily to his office for a kiss. There can 
be no doubt, therefore, that petitioner used his 
official position in committing the acts complained 
of. While it is true, as petitioner argues, that public 
office is not an element of the crime of acts of 
lasciviousness, defined and penalized under Article 
336 of the Revised Penal Code, nonetheless, he 
could not have committed the crimes charged were 
it not for the fact that as the Presiding Judge of the 
MTCC, Branch I, Cabanatuan City, he has the 
authority to recommend the appointment of Ana 
May as bookbinder. In other words, the crimes 
allegedly committed are intimately connected with 
his office. (Esteban v. Sandiganbayan) 
 
Petitioner claims that she is not a public officer with 
Salary Grade 27; she is, in fact, a regular tuition fee-
paying student. This is likewise bereft of merit. It is 
not only the salary grade that determines the 
jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan. The 
Sandiganbayan also has jurisdiction over other 
officers enumerated in P.D. No. 1606. In 
Geduspan v. People, We held that while the first part of 
Section 4(A) covers only officials with Salary Grade 
27 and higher, its second part specifically includes 
other executive officials whose positions may not be 
of Salary Grade 27 and higher but who are by 
express provision of law placed under the 
jurisdiction of the said court. Petitioner falls under 
the jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan as she is placed 
there by express provision of law. 
 
Section 4(A)(1)(g) of P.D. No. 1606 explictly vested 
the Sandiganbayan with jurisdiction over 
Presidents, directors or trustees, or managers of 
government-owned or controlled corporations, 
state universities or educational institutions or 
foundations. Petitioner falls under this category. 
As the Sandiganbayan pointed out, the BOR 
performs functions similar to those of a board of 
trustees of a non-stock corporation. By express 
mandate of law, petitioner is, indeed, a public 
officer as contemplated by P.D. No. 1606. 
 
Moreover, it is well established that compensation 
is not an essential element of public office. At 
most, it is merely incidental to the public office. 
(Serana v. Sandiganbayan) 
 
Jurisdiction of Sandiganbayan in specific special 
criminal laws  
1) Anti-Money Laundering Cases 
RA 9160 
SEC. 5. Jurisdiction of Money Laundering Cases. — The 
regional trial courts shall have jurisdiction to try all 
cases on money laundering. Those committed by 
public officers and private persons who are in 
conspiracy with such public officers shall be 
under the jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan. 
 
2) Plunder 
RA 7080 
Section 3. Competent Court - Until otherwise provided 
by law, all prosecutions under this Act shall be 
within the original jurisdiction of the 
Sandiganbayan. 
 
Private persons 
The controlling doctrine here is that a private person 
may be charged in conspiracy with a public officer 
or officers. There must be an element of a perpetrator 
that is a public official which comes under the 
jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan only then, a private 
person also be impleaded or included in the case that 
is filed. Hence, it is a settled rule that a private person 
when acting in conspiracy with public officers may be 
indicted and if found guilty held liable for criminal 
violations defined and penalized under our laws. Even 
if the public officer to whom the private person 
conspired with dies during the trial, death extinguishes 
criminal liability but the extinguishment of the 
criminal liability of the public officer does not 
erase if proven that there was conspiracy. 
Therefore, the only burden of the prosecution is to 
prove that the public officer and the private person 

--- PAGE 11 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
11 
conspired. If this is proven beyond reasonable doubt 
whether or not the public officer is alive. Private 
person can be indicted and be found guilty of the 
criminal offense by the Sandiganbayan 
 
5) Civil and criminal cases filed pursuant to and in 
connection with EO Nos. 1, 2, 14, and 14-A 
issued in 1986. These are executive orders 
issued to recover the ill-gotten wealth 
accumulated by the late President Ferdinand 
Marcos, his immediate family, relatives, 
subordinates, and close associates. This created 
what is now called the Presidential 
Commission on Good Government (PCGG). 
It is not only jurisdiction in the criminal case 
but also jurisdiction over the civil case on the 
recovery of the ill-gotten wealth. 
 
XPN/Proviso: Because of RA 10660 which amended 
the Sandiganbayan Law, where the Information 
charging the offense:  
1) does not allege any damage to the government 
or does not allege any bribery; or  
2) it alleges damage to the government or bribery 
arising from the same or closely related 
transactions or acts in an amount that is not 
exceeding one million pesos (P1,000,000.00) 
The exclusive original jurisdiction will not be with the 
Sandiganbayan but with the RTC. 
 
Column 2 (persons who are covered by the 
Sandiganbayan Law)  
Where one or more of the accused officials occupying 
the following positions in the government whether 
permanent, acting or interim capacity at the time of the 
commission of the offense.  
 
1) First Category - Officials of the executive 
branch occupying the positions of regional 
director and higher. Otherwise classified as SG 
27 and higher under the Compensation and 
Position Classification Act of 1989; those 
members of Congress or officials thereof, 
which is Salary Grade 27 or higher; or all other 
national or local officials which are Salary 
Grade 27 or higher.  
2) Second category - Those specifically 
enumerated under the Sandiganbayan Law  
A) Provincial governors, vice-governors, 
members of the sangguniang panlalawigan, 
and provincial treasurers, assessors, 
engineers, and other provincial department 
heads: 
B) City mayors, vice-mayors, members of the 
sangguniang panlungsod, city treasurers, 
assessors, engineers, and other city 
department heads; 
C) Officials of the diplomatic service 
occupying the position of consul and 
higher; 
D) Philippine army and air force colonels, 
naval captains, and all officers of higher 
rank; 
E) Officers of the Philippine National Police 
while occupying the position of provincial 
director and those holding the rank of 
senior superintendent and higher; 
F) City and provincial prosecutors and their 
assistants, and officials and prosecutors in 
the Office of the Ombudsman and special 
prosecutor; 
G) Presidents, directors or trustees, or 
managers of government-owned or 
controlled corporations, state universities 
or educational institutions or foundations. 
 
It is of no moment that the position of petitioner is 
merely classified as salary grade 26. While the first 
part of the above quoted provision covers only 
officials of the executive branch with the salary grade 
27 and higher, the second part thereof "specifically 
includes" other executive officials whose positions 
may not be of grade 27 and higher but who are by 
express provision of law placed under the 
jurisdiction of the said court. (Geduspan v. People) 
 
3) Third category - consists of specifically 
enumerated public officials which are actually 
more than Salary Grade 27, but because of the 
provisions of the Constitution, they cannot 
come under the jurisdiction of the 
Sandiganbayan, unless they are removed via 
impeachment.  
A) Members of the judiciary without prejudice 
to the provisions of the Constitution; 
B) Chairmen and members of the 
Constitutional Commissions, without 
prejudice to the provisions of the 
Constitution; and 
 
The original exclusive jurisdiction of special 
courts, regional courts and municipal trial courts 
 
Special courts 
1) Family Courts 
2) Dangerous Drugs Courts 
3) Intellectual Property Courts 
4) Shari’a Circuit Courts 
 
Family Courts 
RA 8369 
Section 5. Jurisdiction of family Courts. - The Family 
Courts shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to 
hear and decide the following cases: 
 
a) Criminal cases where one or more of the accused 
is below eighteen (18) years of age but not less than 
nine (9) years of age but not less than nine (9) years 
of age or where one or more of the victims is a minor 
at the time of the commission of the offense: 
Provided, That if the minor is found guilty, the court 

--- PAGE 12 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
12 
shall promulgate sentence and ascertain any civil 
liability which the accused may have incurred. 
 
The sentence, however, shall be suspended without 
need of application pursuant to Ptesidential Decree 
No. 603, otherwise known as the "Child and Youth 
Welfare Code"; 
 
b) Petitions for guardianship, custody of children, 
habeas corpus in relation to the latter; 
 
c) Petitions for adoption of children and the 
revocation thereof; 
 
d) Complaints for annulment of marriage, 
declaration of nullity of marriage and those relating 
to marital status and property relations of husband 
and wife or those living together under different 
status and agreements, and petitions for dissolution 
of conjugal partnership of gains; 
 
e) Petitions for support and/or acknowledgment; 
 
f) Summary judicial proceedings brought under the 
provisions of Executive Order No. 209, otherwise 
known as the "Family Code of the Philippines"; 
 
g) Petitions for declaration of status of children as 
abandoned, dependent or neglected children, 
petitions for voluntary or involuntary commitment 
of children; the suspension, termination, or 
restoration of parental authority and other cases 
cognizable under Presidential Decree No. 603, 
Executive Order No. 56, (Series of 1986), and other 
related laws; 
 
h) Petitions for the constitution of the family home; 
 
i) Cases against minors cognizable under the 
Dangerous Drugs Act, as amended; 
 
j) Violations of Republic Act No. 7610, otherwise 
known as the "Special Protection of Children 
Against Child Abuse, Exploitation and 
Discrimination Act," as amended by Republic Act 
No. 7658; and 
 
k) Cases of domestic violence against: 
 
1) Women - which are acts of gender-based 
violence that results, or are likely to result in 
physical, sexual or psychological harm or 
suffering to women; and other forms of 
physical abuse such as battering or threats 
and coercion which violate a woman's 
personhood, integrity and freedom 
movement; and 
2) Children - which include the commission of 
all forms of abuse, neglect, cruelty, 
exploitation, violence, and discrimination 
and all other conditions prejudicial to their 
development. 
 
Jurisdiction of family courts in criminal 
proceedings 
1) Criminal cases where one or more of the 
accused is below eighteen (18) years of age but 
not less than nine (9) years of age or where one 
or more of the victims is a minor at the time of 
the commission of the offense. 
2) Cases against minors cognizable under the 
Dangerous Drugs Act, as amended;  
3) Violations of Republic Act No. 7610, 
otherwise known as the "Special Protection of 
Children Against Child Abuse, Exploitation 
and Discrimination Act," as amended by 
Republic Act No. 7658; and 
4) Cases of domestic violence against:  
1) Women; and  
2) Children 
5) Violation of RA 9775, otherwise known as 
“Anti-Child Pornography Act of 2009” 
6) Criminal cases involving juveniles if no 
preliminary investigation is required 
 
Jurisdiction of Dangerous Drugs Courts 
GR: Violations in Dangerous Drugs Act under RA 
9165  
XPN: those cases against minors cognizable under 
the Dangerous Drugs Act, which is under the Family 
Courts 
 
Jurisdiction of Intellectual Property Courts  
The regional trial court designated by SC as Intellectual 
Property Courts will have jurisdiction over all criminal 
violations of the Intellectual Property Code and its 
related laws 
 
Jurisdiction of Shari’a Circuit Court 
RA 1083 
Article 155. Jurisdiction. The Shari'a Circuit Courts 
shall have exclusive original jurisdiction over; 
 
(1) All cases involving offenses defined and 
punished under this Code. 
 
xx 
 
Exclusive original jurisdiction over all cases involving 
all offenses defined and punished under the Code of 
Muslim Personal Laws, namely 
1) Illegal solemnization of marriage;  
2) Marriage before expiration of Idda;  
3) Offenses relative to subsequent marriage, 
divorce and revocation of divorce;  
4) Failure to report for registration; and  
5) Neglect of duty by registrars 
 
Q: Will the provisions of the RPC on bigamy apply 
to Muslims? 
A: No. The provisions of the RPC relative to the crime 
of bigamy shall not apply to a person married in 
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Muslim 
Personal Laws of the Philippines, or before its 
effectivity, under the Muslim Law 
 
Regular Courts 

--- PAGE 13 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
13 
1) Supreme court 
2) Court of appeals 
3) Regional trial courts 
4) Metropolitan trial courts, municipal trial courts 
in cities, municipal trial courts, municipal 
circuit trial courts 
 
Metropolitan Trial Courts, Municipal Trial Courts in 
cities, Municipal Trial Courts or Municipal Circuit 
Courts 
1) All offenses punishable of imprisonment not 
exceeding 6 years irrespective of the amount of 
fine and regardless of other imposable 
accessory or other penalties;  
2) Offenses involving damage to property to 
criminal negligence, where the imposable fine 
does not exceed P10, 000 pesos;  
3) Where the only penalty provided by law is a 
fine not exceeding P4, 000 pesos; and  
4) Those covered by the rules of summary 
procedure as follows:  
a) Violations of traffic laws, rules and 
regulations;  
b) Violation of the rental law;  
c) Violation of municipal or city ordinances;  
d) Violations of BP 22 (Bouncing Checks 
Law); e. All other criminal cases where the 
penalty is imprisonment not exceeding 6 
months and/or a fine of P1, 000 pesos 
irrespective of all other penalties or civil 
liabilities arising therefrom  
5) All offenses committed by a public officer or 
employee in relation to their office including 
government-owned or controlled 
corporations, and by private individuals 
charged as a co-principal, accomplice, or 
accessory punishable with imprisonment of 
not more than 6 years or where none of the 
accused holds a position classified as SG 27 or 
higher 
 
Regional Trial Court 
This is the catch-all court. It covers:  
1) Criminal cases not within the exclusive 
jurisdiction of any court, tribunal, or body;  
2) Cases where the penalty provided by the law 
exceeds 6 years of imprisonment irrespective 
of fine;  
3) Cases not falling within the exclusive original 
jurisdiction of the SB, where the imposable 
penalty is imprisonment of more than 6 years 
and none of the accused is occupying positions 
classified as SG 27 or higher and the proviso 
under RA 10660 
 
RA 10660 
Provided, That the Regional Trial Court 
shall have exclusive original jurisdiction 
where the information: (a) does not allege 
any damage to the government or any 
bribery; or (b) alleges damage to the 
government or bribery arising from the 
same or closely related transactions or 
acts in an amount not exceeding One 
million pesos (P1,000,000.00) 
 
4) Cases where the only penalty provided by law 
is a fine exceeding P4, 000 pesos;  
5) Other laws which specifically lodge the 
jurisdiction in the RTC, such as: a 
a) criminal and civil aspects of written 
defamation under Art. 360 of RPC  
b) criminal cases properly termed Election 
Cases under Omnibus Election Code even 
if committed by a public official with a SG 
27 or higher It is not in SB because the 1st 
column did not enumerate election 
offenses (in SB Law).  
6) Money laundering that is committed by private 
individuals. 
 
Appellate jurisdiction 
The basic premise is all appeals from  
1) All appeals from Court of Appeals go to 
Supreme Court 
2) All appeal from Sandiganbayan go to Supreme 
Court.  
3) All appeals from first level courts MTC, 
MTCC, MCTC go to the RTC regardless of the 
issue.  
 
Where do you appeal a decision from the RTC?  
GR: Appeals, by notice of appeal or petition for 
review, from Decisions of The Regional Trial Court are 
appealable to the Court of Appeals  
1) Petition for review 
2) Notice of appeal 
 
XPN: 
1) Appealing to Supreme Court directly - All cases 
in which only an error or question of law is 
involved.  
NOTE: SC has no exclusive jurisdiction. It 
may be appealed to CA 
2) Appealing to Sandiganbayan - All cases decided 
by the RTC, whether in its original or appellate 
jurisdiction which would have been within the 
jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan if any of the 
accused had been occupying positions 
corresponding to Salary Grade “27” or higher, 
as prescribed in the said R.A. No. 6758, or 
military and PNP officer mentioned in the 
Sandiganbayan law. 
 
Katarungang Pambarangay 
If you file an information in court without proper 
barangay conciliation certification the court 
through a motion of the defendant may: 
1) Dismiss for failure to state a cause of action or 
prematurity or 
2) the court may suspend the proceedings upon 
petition of either party and refer the case to the 

--- PAGE 14 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
14 
appropriate barangay authority to conduct the 
proper barangay conciliation. 
 
GR: All dispute must be referred to or must come 
under barangay conciliation process under the said law.  
XPNs:  
1) Where one party is the government, or any 
subdivision or instrumentality thereof; 
2) Where one party is a public officer or 
employee, and the dispute relates to the 
performance of his official functions;  
3) Where the dispute involves real properties 
located in different cities and municipalities,  
XPN of XPN: the parties thereto agree to 
submit their difference to amicable settlement 
by an appropriate Lupon 
4) Any complaint by or against corporations, 
partnership or juridical entities, since only 
individuals shall be parties to Barangay 
conciliation proceedings either as 
complainants or respondents  
5) Disputes involving parties who actually 
reside in barangays of different cities or 
municipalities, XPN of XPN: where such 
barangay units adjoin each other and the parties 
thereto agree to submit their differences to 
amicable settlement by an appropriate Lupon;  
6) Offenses* for which the law prescribes a 
maximum penalty of imprisonment exceeding 
one (1) year or a fine over five thousand pesos 
(P5,000.00);  
*cases covered under the Katarungang 
Pambarangay are those with imposable penalty 
is less than 1 year or a year of less than 5,000 
pesos. 
7) Offenses where there is no private offended 
party;  
8) Disputes where urgent legal action is necessary 
to prevent injustice from being committed or 
further continued, specifically the following: 
a) Criminal cases where accused is under 
police custody or detention 
b) Petitions for habeas corpus by a person 
illegally deprived of his rightful custody 
over another or a person illegally deprived 
or on acting in his behalf;  
c) Actions coupled with provisional remedies 
such as preliminary injunction, attachment, 
delivery of personal property and support 
during the pendency of the action; and  
d) Actions which may be barred by the Statute 
of Limitations.  
9) Any class of disputes which the President may 
determine in the interest of justice or upon the 
recommendation of the Secretary of Justice;  
10) Where the dispute arises from the 
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law 
(CARL);  
11) Labor disputes or controversies arising from 
employeremployee relations;  
12) Actions to annul judgment upon a compromise 
which may be filed directly in court. 
 
Process to be followed 
1) An individual who has a cause of action to 
another individual can orally or in writing 
approach the Lupon chairman or barangay 
captain.  
2) Complain and file the appropriate fee. The 
Lupon Charirman will issue a summon to the 
parties for them to talk and settle the matter  
3) While the settlement talks is happening, it will 
for 60 days from the complaint is filed toll 
the prescriptive period of the offense.  
4) The lupon chairman will try for 15 days to 
settle. If he fails then he must constitute with 
Pangkat ng Tagapamayapa*.  
*According to Local Government Code, 
members of Pangkat ng Tagapamayapa are 
members of barangay.  
5) The pangkat shall arrive at a settlement or 
resolution of the dispute within fifteen (15) 
days from the day it convenes in accordance 
with this section. This period shall, at the 
discretion of the pangkat, be extendible for 
another period which shall not exceed 
fifteen (15) days, except in clearly 
meritorious cases 
 
Under the Circular, there is a requirement that the 
Lupon Secretary and the secretary of the 
pangkat will 
1) issue a certificate that a confrontation of the 
parties took place but no 
conciliation/settlement has been reached or  
2) that no personal confrontation took place 
before the Pangkat through no fault of the 
complainant. 
 
Parties are members of indigenous cultural 
community 
It shall be settled in accordance with the customs and 
traditions of that particular cultural community 
 
If no settlement, the Punong Barangay will issue the 
certification to file action upon certification by the datu 
or tribal leader or elder to the Punong Barangay of 
place of settlement.  
 
It is well-settled that the non-referral of a case for 
barangay conciliation when so required under the 
law is not jurisdictional in nature and may therefore 
be deemed waived if not raised seasonably in a 
motion to dismiss. The Court notes that although 
petitioners could have invoked the ground of 
prematurity of the causes of action against them 
due to the failure to submit the dispute to Lupon 
prior to the filing of the cases as soon as they 
received the complaints against them, 
petitioners raised the said ground only after 
their arraignment. 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
15 
The rule is, prior to arraignment, you must raise 
it in order for the court to dismiss or suspend it 
and refer to proper barangay. After arraignment it 
is deemed waived. (Bañares II v. Balising) 
 
RULE 110 
PROSECUTION OF OFFENSES 
 
INSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL ACTIONS 
Section 1. Institution of criminal actions – Criminal 
actions shall be instituted as follows: 
a) For offenses where a preliminary 
investigation is required pursuant to section 
1 of Rule 112, by filing the complaint with 
the proper officer for the purpose of 
conducting the requisite preliminary 
investigation. 
b) For all other offenses, by filing the complaint 
or information directly with the Municipal 
Trial Courts and Municipal Circuit Trial 
Courts, or the complaint with the office of 
the prosecutor. In Manila and other 
chartered cities, the complaints shall be filed 
with the office of the prosecutor unless 
otherwise provided in their charters. 
 
The institution of the criminal action shall interrupt 
the running of the period of prescription of the 
offense charged unless otherwise provided in special 
laws. 
 
Purpose of criminal action 
The purpose of criminal action, in its purest sense, is 
to determine the penal liability of the accused for 
having outraged the State with his crime, and if he 
is found guilty, to punish him for it. 
 
Parties in a criminal action 
1) Offender – private suspect/guilty party;  
2) Offended party – State 
3) Complainant – acts as witness for the 
prosecution; the interest of the private 
complainant is limited to the civil liability 
 
How can criminal actions be instituted? 
1) For offenses where a preliminary investigation 
is required pursuant to section 1 of Rule 112, 
by filing the complaint with the proper 
officer for the purpose of conducting the 
requisite preliminary investigation 
 
Rules of Court, Rule 112 
Section 1. Preliminary investigation defined; when required. 
– Preliminary investigation is an inquiry or 
proceeding to determine whether there is sufficient 
ground to engender a well-founded belief that a 
crime has been committed and the respondent is 
probably guilty thereof, and should be held for trial. 
 
Except as provided in Section 7 of this Rule, a 
preliminary investigation is required to be conducted 
before the filing of a compliant or information for 
an offense where the penalty prescribed by law is at 
least four (4) years, two (2) months and one (1) day 
without regard to the fine. 
 It is a statutory and not a constitutional 
right 
 Merely to present such evidence as may 
engender a well-founded belief that an 
offense has been committed and that 
the respondent is probably guilty 
 Petitioner has no right to cross-
examine the witness 
 Injunction will not lie to stop 
preliminary investigation 
 Submission of affidavits and counter-
affidavits 
 
Rules of Court, Rule 112 
Section 7. When accused lawfully arrested without warrant. 
– When a person is lawfully arrested without a 
warrant involving an offense which requires a 
preliminary investigation, the complaint or 
information may be filed by a prosecutor without 
need of such investigation provided an inquest has 
been conducted in accordance with existing rules. In 
the absence or unavailability of an inquest 
prosecutor, the complaint may be filed by the 
offended party or a peace officer directly with the 
proper court on the basis of the affidavit of the 
offended party or arresting officer or person. 
 
Before the complaint or information is filed, the 
person arrested may ask for a preliminary 
investigation in accordance with this Rule, but he 
must sign a waiver of the provision of Article 125 of 
the Revised Penal Code, as amended, in the presence 
of his counsel. Notwithstanding the waiver, he may 
apply for bail and the investigation must be 
terminated within fifteen (15) days from its 
inception. 
 
After the filing of the complaint or information in 
court without a preliminary investigation, the 
accused may, within five (5) days from the time he 
learns of its filing, ask for a preliminary investigation 
with the same right to adduce evidence in his defense 
as provided in this Rule. 
 
Revised Penal Code 
Art. 125. Delay in the delivery of detained persons to the 
proper judicial authorities. — The penalties provided in 
the next preceding article shall be imposed upon the 
public officer or employee who shall detain any 
person for some legal ground and shall fail to deliver 
such person to the proper judicial authorities within 
the period of; twelve (12) hours, for crimes or 
offenses punishable by light penalties, or their 
equivalent; eighteen (18) hours, for crimes or 
offenses punishable by correctional penalties, or 
their equivalent and thirty-six (36) hours, for crimes, 
or offenses punishable by afflictive or capital 
penalties, or their equivalent. 
 
In every case, the person detained shall be informed 
of the cause of his detention and shall be allowed 

--- PAGE 16 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
16 
upon his request, to communicate and confer at any 
time with his attorney or counsel. 
 
GR: ( PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION) 
preliminary investigation is required to be conducted 
before the filing of a compliant or information for an 
offense where the penalty prescribed by law is at least 
four (4) years, two (2) months and one (1) day 
without regard to the fine 
 
XPN: ( INQUEST PROCEEDINGS) When a 
person is lawfully arrested without a warrant 
involving an offense which requires a preliminary 
investigation, the complaint or information may be 
filed by a prosecutor without need of such 
investigation provided an inquest has been 
conducted in accordance with existing rules.  
 
XPN of XPN: ( DIRECT FILING TO THE 
COURT) In the absence or unavailability of an 
inquest prosecutor, the complaint may be filed by 
the offended party or a peace officer directly with 
the proper court on the basis of the affidavit of the 
offended party or arresting officer or person. 
 Before the complaint or information is 
filed, the person arrested may ask for 
a preliminary investigation in 
accordance with this Rule, but he must 
sign a waiver of the provision of 
Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code, 
as amended, in the presence of his 
counsel. 
 After the filing of the complaint or 
information in court without a 
preliminary investigation, the accused 
may, within five (5) days from the 
time he learns of its filing, ask for a 
preliminary investigation with the 
same right to adduce evidence in his 
defense as provided in this Rule. 
 
The filing to the court of authority will toll the 
running of the period under Art 125. 
 
2) For all other offenses, by filing the complaint 
or information directly with the Municipal 
Trial Courts and Municipal Circuit Trial 
Courts, or the complaint with the office of 
the prosecutor. In Manila and other chartered 
cities, the complaints shall be filed with the 
office of the prosecutor unless otherwise 
provided in their charters. 
 
How about for those offenses where the 
prescribed penalty is less than 4 years, 2 months?  
GR: (DIRECT FILING TO THE COURT) A 
preliminary investigation is not required and a criminal 
action is instituted in either of two ways:  
1) By filing the complaint or information directly 
with the MTC, MCTC, MeTC (first level 
courts); or 
2) By filing the complaint with the office of the 
prosecutor 
 
Special rule: In Manila and other chartered cities, 
the complaints shall be filed with the office of the 
prosecutor unless otherwise provided in their charters. 
 
“Proper officer” 
1) City Prosecutor’s Office,  
2) Municipal Prosecutor’s Office, or the 
3) Prosecution Offices under the Department of 
Justice (DOJ). 
4) Ombudsman  
 
Effect of institution of criminal action 
GR: The institution of the criminal action shall 
interrupt the running of the period of prescription of 
the offense charged  
XPN: unless otherwise provided in special laws. 
 The prescriptive period as provided by the 
special penal law 
 If no provision – Act No 3326 
 
The running of the period of prescription is 
interrupted with the filing of the action even if the 
court in which the action is first filed is without 
jurisdiction 
 
Act No. 3326 
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH PERIODS OF 
PRESCRIPTION FOR VIOLATIONS 
PENALIZED BY SPECIAL ACTS AND 
MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES AND TO 
PROVIDE WHEN PRESCRIPTION SHALL 
BEGIN TO RUN 
Section 1. Violations penalized by special acts shall, 
unless otherwise provided in such acts, prescribe in 
accordance with the following rules:  
a) after a year for offenses punished only by a 
fine or by imprisonment for not more than 
one month, or both; (< 1 month) 
b) after four years for those punished by 
imprisonment for more than one month, 
but less than two years; (1 month – 2 years) 
c) after eight years for those punished by 
imprisonment for two years or more, but less 
than six years; and (2-6 years) 
d) after twelve years for any other offense 
punished by imprisonment for six years or 
more, except the crime of treason, which 
shall prescribe after twenty years. Violations 
penalized by municipal ordinances shall 
prescribe after two months. (6-20 years) 
 
Sec. 2. Prescription shall begin to run from the day of 
the commission of the violation of the law, and if the 
same be not known at the time, from the discovery 
thereof and the institution of judicial proceeding for its 
investigation and punishment. 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
17 
The prescription shall be interrupted when 
proceedings are instituted against the guilty 
person, and shall begin to run again if the 
proceedings are dismissed for reasons not 
constituting jeopardy. 
 
Sec. 3. For the purposes of this Act, special acts shall 
be acts defining and penalizing violations of the law not 
included in the Penal Code. 
 
Sec. 4. This Act shall take effect on its approval. 
 
Section 5. Who must prosecute criminal action. - All 
criminal actions either commenced by complaint or 
by information shall be prosecuted under the 
direction and control of a public prosecutor. In case 
of heavy work schedule of the public prosecutor or 
in the event of lack of public prosecutors, the private 
prosecutor may be authorized in writing by the Chief 
of the Prosecution Office or the Regional State 
Prosecutor to prosecute the case subject to the 
approval of the court. Once so authorized to 
prosecute the criminal action, the private prosecutor 
shall continue to prosecute the case up to end of the 
trial even in the absence of a public prosecutor, 
unless the authority is revoked or otherwise 
withdrawn.  x x x"). 
 
The crimes of adultery and concubinage shall not be 
prosecuted except upon a complaint filed by the 
offended spouse. The offended party cannot 
institute criminal prosecution without including the 
guilty parties, if both are alive, nor, in any case, if the 
offended party has consented to the offense or 
pardoned the offenders. 
 
The offenses of seduction, abduction and acts of 
lasciviousness shall not be prosecuted upon a 
complaint filed by the offended party of her parents, 
grandparents or guardian, nor, in any case, if the 
offender has been expressly pardoned by any of 
them. If the offended party dies or becomes 
incapacitated before she can file the complaint, and 
she has no known parents, grandparents or guardian, 
the State shall initiate the criminal action in her 
behalf.  
 
The offended party, even if a minor, has the right to 
initiate the prosecution of the offenses of seduction, 
abduction and acts of lasciviousness independently 
of her parents, grandparents, or guardian, unless she 
is incompetent or incapable of doing so. Where the 
offended party, who is a minor, fails to file the 
complaint, her parents, grandparents, or guardian 
may file the same. The right to file the action granted 
to parents, grandparents, or guardian shall be 
exclusive of all other persons and shall be exercised 
successively in the order herein provided, except as 
stated in the preceding paragraph. 
 
No criminal action for defamation which consists in 
the imputation of any of the offenses mentioned 
above shall be brought except at the instance of and 
upon complaint filed by the offended party. 
 
The prosecution for violation of special laws shall be 
governed by the provision thereof. 
 
1ST PARAGRAPH 
PROSECUTION OF CRIMINAL ACTION 
GR: All criminal actions either commenced by a 
complaint or information shall be prosecuted under 
the direction and control of the public prosecutor. 
This is the general rule and this applies to a criminal 
action commenced either by a complaint or an 
information. 
 
XPNs:  
1) In case of heavy work schedule of the public 
prosecutor or in the event of lack of public 
prosecutors (A.M. No. 02-2-07-SC) 
 
A.M. No. 02-2-07-SC 
RE: PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO 
SECTION 5, RULE 110 OF THE REVISED 
RULES OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 
Sec 5 – xxxIn case of heavy work schedule of the public 
prosecutor or in the event of lack of public 
prosecutors, the private prosecutor may be  
1) authorized in writing by the Chief of the 
Prosecution Office or the Regional State 
Prosecutor to prosecute the case subject to the 
approval of the court 
2) Once so authorized to prosecute the criminal 
action, the private prosecutor shall continue to 
prosecute the case up to end of the trial even 
in the absence of a public prosecutor, 
XPN: unless the authority is revoked or 
otherwise withdrawn. 
 
2) Intervention of the private prosecutor 
 
Rules on appearance of private prosecutor under 
the continuous trial rule in criminal cases 
Q: When can the private prosecutor be allowed to 
prosecute? 
A: The rule is provided in AM No 15-06-10SC 
A.M. No. 15-06-10 
Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of 
Criminal Cases 
III, Par 4. In cases where only the civil liability is 
being prosecuted by the private prosecutor, the head 
of the prosecution office must issue in favor of the 
private prosecutor a written authority to try the case 
even in the absence of the public prosecutor. The 
written authority must be submitted to the court prior 
to the presentation of evidence by the private 
prosecutor in accordance with Section 5, Rule 110. 
 
With this authority on record, the court may set the 
trial in the case and in other cases tried by the private 
prosecutors with delegated authority on separate days 
when the presence of the public prosecutor may be 
dispensed with. 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
18 
XPN of XPN: The offended party may not intervene 
in the prosecution of the offense through a private 
prosecutor if the offended party  
1) waives the civil action,  
2) reserves the right to institute it separately, or  
3) institutes the civil action prior to the criminal 
action. 
 
Q: What if the case reaches the CA or the SC?  
A: Jurisprudence holds that if there is a dismissal of the 
criminal case by the trial court or if there is an acquittal 
of the accused, it is only the Office of the Solicitor 
General (OSG) that may bring an appeal on the 
criminal aspect representing the People of the 
Philippines. In cases elevated to the Sandiganbayan, 
the Office of the Ombudsman thru its special 
prosecutor shall represent the People of the 
Philippines 
 
Q: What is the rationale of placing the prosecution of 
the criminal case under the direct control and 
supervision of the public prosecutor? 
A: To prevent malicious or unfounded prosecution 
by private persons. The right to prosecute vest to the 
prosecutor a wide range of discretion, the discretion of 
whether what and whom to charge, the exercise of 
which depends on factors which are best appreciated 
by the public prosecutor  
 
Q: What is the nature and purpose of the power of the 
public prosecutor to prosecute criminal cases? 
A: Prosecution of crimes pertains to the executive 
department of the government whose principal 
power and responsibility is to insure that laws are 
faithfully executed, which includes the power to 
prosecute violators 
 
Q: What is the effect if the private complainant’s 
motion for reconsideration does not bear the 
imprimatur of the public prosecutor? 
A: The petition will fail if the motion for 
reconsideration did not bear the imprimatur of the 
public prosecutor who has the control of the 
prosecution of the case. The participation in the case 
of a private complainant is limited to that of a witness, 
both in the criminal and civil aspect. 
 
Q: Is it required that the prosecutor be present during 
the prosecution of the criminal action? 
A: Yes, the duty of the prosecutor to direct and control 
the prosecution of criminal cases requires that he must 
be present during the proceedings. 
 
Doctrine of primary jurisdiction 
The courts must refrain from determining a 
controversy involving a question which is within the 
jurisdiction of an administrative tribunal prior to its 
resolution by the latter, where the question demands 
the exercise of sound administrative discretion 
requiring the special knowledge, experience and 
services of the administrative tribunal to determine 
technical and intricate matters of fact. 
 
2ND PARAGRAPH 
RPC 
Art. 344. Prosecution of the crimes of adultery, concubinage, 
seduction, abduction, rape and acts of lasciviousness. — The 
crimes of adultery and concubinage shall not be 
prosecuted except upon a complaint filed by the 
offended spouse. 
 
The offended party cannot institute criminal 
prosecution without including both the guilty 
parties, if they are both alive, nor, in any case, if he 
shall have consented or pardoned the offenders. 
 
The offenses of seduction, abduction, rape or acts of 
lasciviousness, shall not be prosecuted except upon 
a complaint filed by the offended party or her 
parents, grandparents, or guardian, nor, in any case, 
if the offender has been expressly pardoned by the 
above-named persons, as the case may be. 
 
In cases of seduction, abduction, acts of 
lasciviousness and rape, the marriage of the offender 
with the offended party shall extinguish the criminal 
action or remit the penalty already imposed upon 
him. The provisions of this paragraph shall also be 
applicable to the co-principals, accomplices and 
accessories after the fact of the above-mentioned 
crimes. 
 
Crimes which cannot be prosecuted de oficio (by 
the prosecutor) (ACASA) 
1) Adultery 
2) Concubinage 
3) Abduction 
4) Seduction 
5) Acts of lasciviousness 
6) * Pursuant to R.A. No. 8353, the Anti-Rape 
Law of 1997, rape is now a crime against 
persons which may be prosecuted de 
oficio. 
 
ADULTERY AND CONCUBINAGE 
 Adultery and concubinage must be prosecuted 
upon complaint signed by the offended 
spouse.  
 The offended party cannot institute 
criminal prosecution without including 
both the guilty parties 
 Both parties must be included in the 
complaint even if one of them is not 
guilty 
XPN:  
1) When one of the parties is dead 
2) When there is pardon or consent 
 
Pardon Consent  
Must come after the act 
but before the institution 
of a criminal prosecution 
Granted prior to the 
adulterous act 
May be express or implied 

--- PAGE 19 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
19 
Bars criminal action Dismisses the criminal 
action 
 
Corollary to such exclusive grant of power to the 
offended spouse to institute the action, it necessarily 
follows that such initiator must have the status, 
capacity or legal representation to do so at the time 
of the filing of the criminal action. This is a familiar 
and express rule in civil actions; in fact, lack of legal 
capacity to sue, as a ground for a motion to dismiss 
in civil cases, is determined as of the filing of the 
complaint or petition. (Pilapil v. Ibay-Somera) 
 
It must be borne in mind, however, that this legal 
requirement was imposed "out of consideration for 
the aggrieved party who might prefer to suffer the 
outrage in silence rather than go through the scandal 
of a public trial." Thus, the law leaves it to the option 
of the aggrieved spouse to seek judicial redress for 
the affront committed by the erring spouse. For 
needless to state, this Court should be guided by the 
spirit, rather than the letter, of the law. 
 
In this case, by the filing of the complaint of the 
husband, it became clear that the desire of the 
offended party was to bring his wife and her alleged 
paramour to justice. Here, it is clear that the husband 
really wants the wife and the paramour to be 
punished because of their adulterous acts, and while 
it is unfortunate that he died to see the prosecution 
of the case, the SC saw that the husband was willing 
to go through the criminal trial. (People v. Ilarde) 
 
3RD PARAGRAPH 
SIMPLE ABDUCTION, SEDUCTION, ACTS OF 
LASCIVIOUSNESS 
 Seduction, abduction, rape* or acts of 
lasciviousness must be prosecuted upon 
complaint signed by —  
a) offended party,  
b) her parents,  
c) grandparents, or  
d) guardians in the order in which they are 
named above.  
XPN: 
1) When one of the parties is dead – 
If the offended party dies or 
becomes incapacitated before she 
can file the complaint, and she has 
no known parents, grandparents or 
guardian, the State shall initiate the 
criminal action in her behalf. (parens 
patriae) 
2) When there is pardon or consent  
 
4TH PARAGRAPH 
 A minor has the right to institute the 
prosecution independently of her parents, 
grandparents, guardian etc. (ASA) 
XPN:  
1) if she is incapable of doing so upon 
grounds other than her minority. It may 
be filed by 
 offended party,  
 her parents,  
 grandparents, or  
 guardians in the order in which 
they are named above.  
2) When there is pardon or consent – the 
minor will have to seek the help of the 
proper government agency for the minor 
to properly execute the express pardon 
 
 
 The term "guardian" means legal, not natural 
guardian 
 In case of complex crimes, where one of the 
component offenses is a public crime, the 
criminal prosecution may be instituted by the 
fiscal (de oficio). Public interest is always 
paramount to private interest 
 
Q: What is the nature of the right of the above-named 
person to file the complaint? 
A: The right to file the action granted to parents, 
grandparents, or guardian shall be exclusive of all the 
other persons and shall be exercised successively in the 
order herein provided (Sec 5 (4), Rule 110) 
 
5TH PARAGRAPH 
DEFAMATION 
Q: Who may file a complaint for defamation? 
A: No criminal action for defamation which consists in 
the imputation of any of the offenses (ACASA) shall 
be brough except at the instance of and upon 
complaint filed by the offended party 
 
For this instance, there is no order and it will only be 
the offended party, even if the defamation, libel or 
slander pertains to seduction, abduction and acts of 
lasciviousness. If the offended party will not initiate the 
complaint, then there can be no criminal prosecution 
for defamation imputing adultery, concubinage, 
seduction, abduction and acts of lasciviousness. 
 
6TH PARAGRAPH 
SPECIAL CRIMES 
Q: What law shall govern special crimes 
A: The prosecution for violation of special laws shall 
be governed by the provision thereof (Sec 5 (6), Rule 
110) 
 
GR: The prosecution for violation of special laws shall 
be governed by the provision thereof 
XPN: When the special law it does not provide for any 
specific provision as to what procedure will govern, it 
would be the Revised Rules on Criminal Procedure. 
 
Section 2. The complaint or information. The complaint 
or information shall be in writing in the name of the 
People of the Philippines against all persons who 
appear to be responsible for the offense involved. 
 
Requisites for complaint/information 

--- PAGE 20 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
20 
1) shall be in writing  
2) in the name of the People of the Philippines  
3) against all persons who appear to be 
responsible for the offense involved. 
 
Q: What is the effect of the failure to implead the 
People of the Philippines in a petition for certiorari? 
A: Not a ground for dismissal of an action. The remedy 
is to implead the non-party claimed to be 
indispensable. If the petitioner/plaintiff refuses to 
implead an indispensable party despite the order of the 
court, the latter may dismiss the complaint/petition. 
 
Q: Who is the real party-in-interest and who can 
represent the People before the SC? 
A: In criminal cases, the People is the real party-in-
interest and only the OSG can represent the People in 
the criminal proceedings before this Court, and the 
private offended party is but a witness in the 
prosecution of offenses whose interest is limited only 
to the civil liability aspect. 
 
Sec. 3. Complaint defined. Complaint is a sworn 
written statement charging a person with an offense, 
subscribed by the offended party, any peace officer 
or the republic officer charged with the enforcement 
of the law violated. 
 
Complaint - sworn written statement charging a 
person with an offense, subscribed by the offended 
party, any peace officer or the republic officer charged 
with the enforcement of the law violated. 
 
2 types of complaints 
1) complaint filed in court 
2) complaint filed with the prosecutor’s office – 
may be filed by any person 
 
Q: What is the nature of the complaint referred to 
under the Rules? 
A: It contemplates to a complaint filed in court to 
commence a criminal action in those cases where a 
complaint of the offended party is required by law, 
instead of an information which is generally filed by a 
fiscal. This does not refer to a complaint filed with the 
prosecutor’s office. 
 
Sec. 4. Information defined. An information is an 
accusation in writing charging a person with an 
offense subscribed by the fiscal and filed with the 
court. 
 
Information - an accusation in writing charging a 
person with an offense subscribed by the fiscal and 
filed with the court 
 
Elements of an information 
1) It is an accusation in writing 
2) It must charge a person with an offense.  
3) It must be subscribed by the prosecutor.  
4) It must be filed with the court 
 
Q: What is the requirement before the filing of a 
criminal information? 
A: It is a requirement that the filing of the information 
must be preceded by a preliminary investigation. 
 
Complaint  Information 
May be subscribed by 
the offended party, any 
peace officer or the 
republic officer 
charged with the 
enforcement of the law 
violated 
Must be subscribed by 
the prosecutor 
Must be filed with  
1) a prosecutor, 
proper officer, 
proper 
prosecution 
office if 
preliminary 
investigation is 
required or  
2) in those 
instances where 
it can be filed 
directly in court 
then that is the 
only time that a 
complaint may 
be filed in court. 
Always filed in court 
Must be sworn by the 
people enumerated 
under Section 3 (if filed 
in court) 
No requirement for 
sworn but must be 
signed by the public 
prosecutor himself 
because he is the one 
filing the information 
and is acting under the 
oath of his office. 
1) Filed to 
prosecutor’s 
office - 
complainant and 
the respondent’s 
name 
2) Filed to court - 
People of the 
Philippines 
versus all 
persons who 
appear to be 
responsible for 
the offense 
involved’. 
‘People of the 
Philippines versus an 
accused’ 
 
Q: What if the complaint is not sworn and signed? 
A: If a complaint is not sworn and signed, this is merely 
a formal defect that can be cured by having the 
complaint signed and sworn to by the person who filed 
it. 
 
Section 6. Sufficiency of complaint or information. — A 
complaint or information is sufficient if it states the 
name of the accused; the designation of the offense 
given by the statute; the acts or omissions 
complained of as constituting the offense; the name 

--- PAGE 21 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
21 
of the offended party; the approximate date of the 
commission of the offense; and the place where the 
offense was committed. 
 
When an offense is committed by more than one 
person, all of them shall be included in the complaint 
or information. (6a) 
 
Test for sufficiency of complaint or information 
The test is whether the crime is described in 
intelligible terms with such particularity as to 
apprise the accused with reasonable certainty of 
the offense charged to enable the accused to suitably 
prepare for his defense. 
 
The purpose of the enumeration of the matters which 
should be stated in the complaint or information for it 
to be sufficient, is to inform the accused of the nature 
and the cause of the accusation against him, a right 
guaranteed by no less than our Constitution. 
 
No matter how conclusive and convincing the 
evidence of guilt may be, an accused cannot be 
convicted of any offense unless it is charged in the 
information on which he is tried or is necessarily 
included therein.  
 
It must contain the following: 
1) name of the accused;  
2) designation of the offense given by the 
statute;  
3) acts or omissions complained of as 
constituting the offense;  
 most important  
4) name of the offended party;  
5) approximate date of the commission of the 
offense; and  
6) place where the offense was committed. 
7) when an offense is committed by more than 
one person, all of them shall be included in 
the complaint or information. 
 
Effect when the complaint or information is 
insufficient 
Where the complaint or information is insufficient, it 
cannot be the basis of any valid conviction 
 
Q: When should the question on the sufficiency of 
information be raised? 
A: Defect on the sufficiency of complaint or 
information should be raised during the course of trial, 
particularly during arraignment  
 
Q: What is the effect of failure to object on the defect 
of the complaint or information as regards the identity 
of the accused? 
A: Their failure to object to the alleged defect before 
entering their pleas of not guilty amounted to a waiver 
of the defect in the information. 
 
Q: Can an objection as to form or substance be raised 
for the first time on appeal? 
A: No. Objections as to matters of form or substance 
in the information cannot be made for the first time on 
appeal, and failure to object constitute a waiver 
 
Q: Can the appellate court dismiss the information for 
failure to raise the issue of defects in the information? 
A: Yes. The Court may motu propio dismiss the said 
information at the appellate stage, because he was not 
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation 
against him and the basic principles of due process.  
 
xx while a sufficiency of an information may be 
assailed, the right to question the sufficiency of the 
same is not absolute. Further, an accused is deemed 
to have waived the right to question the sufficiency 
of the complaint or information if he fails to object 
upon his arraignment or during trial. (Friyas v. People) 
 
The real nature of the criminal charge is determined 
not from the caption or the preamble of the 
information or from the specification of the 
provision of law alleged to have been violated which 
are mere conclusions of law, but by the actual 
recital of the facts in the complaint or 
information. 
 
Thus, even if the designation of the crime in the 
information is defective, what is controlling is the 
allegation of the facts in the information that 
comprises a crime and adequately describes the 
nature and the cause of the accusation against the 
accused. (Friyas v. People) 
 
Section 7. Name of the accused. — The complaint or 
information must state the name and surname of the 
accused or any appellation or nickname by which he 
has been or is known. If his name cannot be 
ascertained, he must be described under a fictitious 
name with a statement that his true name is 
unknown. 
 
If the true name of the accused is thereafter 
disclosed by him or appears in some other manner 
to the court, such true name shall be inserted in the 
complaint or information and record. (7a) 
 
Name of the accused 
1) Known - The complaint or information must 
state the name and surname of the accused or 
any appellation or nickname by which he has 
been or is known 
2) Not known - he must be described under a 
fictitious name with a statement that his true 
name is unknown. 
3) Unknown at first but thereafter disclosed or 
appeared - such true name shall be inserted in 
the complaint or information and record 
 
Q: What is the effect of erroneous designation of the 
name of the accused in the information? 
A: The erroneous designation of the name of the 
accused in the information will not vitiate the 

--- PAGE 22 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
22 
information filed, in so long as, the identity of the 
accused is clearly proven. 
 
Thus, in every criminal case, the task of the prosecution 
is always two-fold:  
1) To prove beyond reasonable doubt the 
commission of the crime charged.  
2) To establish with the same quantum of proof 
(proof beyond reasonable doubt) the identity 
of the person/s responsible therefore. 
 
Q: What is the consequence if another’s name is placed 
in the information? 
A: Information is not defective where another name, 
not the victim’s name, was placed in the information 
since the error is considered merely clerical and not 
substantial.  
 
Q: What is the effect if the accused enters his plea 
under a wrong name? 
A: An accused who entered a plea of not guilty under 
a wrong name is estopped from later on questioning 
court’s jurisdiction over his person 
 
The reluctance of the offended party in a rape case, 
in identifying the accused saying, "that it might be 
him,” which means that the private offended party 
is uncertain as to the identity of the accused, leads 
the Supreme Court to conclude that the identity of 
the accused was not proven. Even if the crime of 
rape was proven beyond reasonable doubt, the 
accused cannot be convicted based on an uncertain 
identification of his identity. However, this does 
not always mean that it is always supposed to be 
a direct evidence of the identity of the offender, 
because positive identification may be in two ways: 
1) A witness may identify a suspect or accused 
in a criminal case as the perpetrator of the 
crime as an eyewitness to the very act of 
the commission of the crime. This will 
constitute direct evidence. (DIRECT 
EVIDENCE) 
2) However, there may be instances where 
there may be a witness who did not actually 
see the very act or the commission of the 
crime but is still able to positively 
identify a suspect or accused as the 
perpetrator of the crime under the second 
type of identification, which forms part of 
circumstantial evidence, which, when taken 
together with all other pieces of evidence 
constituting an unbroken chain, leads to 
only one fair and reasonable conclusion: 
that the accused is the author of the 
crime, to the exclusion of all others. 
(CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE) 
(People v. Tumambing) 
 
Section 11. Date of commission of the offense. — It is not 
necessary to state in the complaint or information 
the precise date the offense was committed except 
when it is a material ingredient of the offense. The 
offense may be alleged to have been committed on 
a date as near as possible to the actual date of its 
commission. (11a) 
 
GR: It is not necessary to state in the complaint or 
information the precise date of the commission of the 
offense since the offence may be alleged to have 
been committed on a date as near as possible to 
the actual date of its commission 
XPN: When it is necessary to state the precise date of 
the offense considering that the date and even 
sometimes the time is a material ingredient of the 
offense. 
 
Q: What is the effect of variance between the time 
alleged in the information and that established by 
evidence on trial? 
A: A variance between the time set out in the 
indictment and that establishment by the evidence 
during the trial does not constitute an error so serious 
as to warrant reversal of a conviction solely on that 
score. The only instance where the variance in the date 
of commission of the offense as alleged in the 
information and as established in evidence becomes 
fatal when the discrepancy is so great that it induces the 
perception that the information and the evidence are 
no longer pertaining to one and the same offense. 
 
Q: When should the date of the commission of the 
offense be alleged in the information? 
A: Only when such date is a material ingredient of the 
offense  
 
Q: What is the effect of failure to particularly allege in 
the information and prove the particular date of the 
commission of the crime? 
A: The failure of the prosecution to allege with 
particularity the date of the commission of the offense 
and worse, its failure to prove during the trial the date 
of the commission of the offense as alleged in the 
information, deprived the accused-appellant of the 
right to intelligently prepare for his defense and 
convincingly refute the charges against him 
 
Section 12. Name of the offended party. — The 
complaint or information must state the name and 
surname of the person against whom or against 
whose property the offense was committed, or any 
appellation or nickname by which such person has 
been or is known. If there is no better way of 
identifying him, he must be described under a 
fictitious name. 
 
(a) In offenses against property, if the name of the 
offended party is unknown, the property must be 
described with such particularity as to properly 
identify the offense charged. 
 
(b) If the true name of the of the person against 
whom or against whose properly the offense was 
committed is thereafter disclosed or ascertained, the 
court must cause the true name to be inserted in the 
complaint or information and the record. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
23 
 
(c) If the offended party is a juridical person, it is 
sufficient to state its name, or any name or 
designation by which it is known or by which it may 
be identified, without need of averring that it is a 
juridical person or that it is organized in accordance 
with law. (12a) 
 
Name of the offended party 
Natural persons 
1) Known - The complaint or information must 
state the name and surname or any appellation 
or nickname by which he has been or is known 
2) Not known - he must be described under a 
fictitious  
 
Juridical persons 
It is sufficient to state its name, or any name or 
designation by which it is known or by which it may be 
identified, without need of averring that it is a juridical 
person or that it is organized in accordance with law 
 
Offenses against property 
GR:  
1) Offended party unknown, property known - 
the property must be described with such 
particularity as to properly identify the offense 
charged 
2) Offended party unknown but later known - If 
the true name of the of the person against 
whom or against whose properly the offense 
was committed is thereafter disclosed or 
ascertained, the court must cause the true name 
to be inserted in the complaint or information 
and the record. 
XPN: robbery with violence and intimidation of 
persons – there must be allegations in the information 
of the name of the owner 
 
Q: What is the remedy of a person charged under an 
erroneous name or identity? 
A: The remedy of a person charged with a wrong name 
or identity is to file a motion to quash on the ground 
of lack of jurisdiction over his person. If he voluntarily 
appears at the arraignment without questioning the 
jurisdiction of the court over his person and pleads not 
guilty at the charge although under the erroneous 
name, the court acquires jurisdiction over him 
 
Section 8. Designation of the offense. — The complaint 
or information shall state the designation of the 
offense given by the statute, aver the acts or 
omissions constituting the offense, and specify its 
qualifying and aggravating circumstances. If there is 
no designation of the offense, reference shall be 
made to the section or subsection of the statute 
punishing it. (8a) 
 
Requirements of designation of offense 
1) state the designation of the offense given 
by the statute - character of the crime is 
determined neither by the caption or preamble 
of the information nor by the specification of 
the provision of law alleged to have been 
violated, they being conclusions of law, but by 
the actual recital of the ultimate facts and 
circumstances in the information (Licayco v. 
People) 
2) aver the acts or omissions constituting the 
offense – fatal; the allegations of facts 
constituting the offense charged are substantial 
matters and the right of an accused to question 
his conviction based on facts not alleged in the 
information cannot be waived 
3) specify its qualifying and aggravating 
circumstances – fatal; failure to state a 
qualifying or aggravating circumstance, even if 
duly proven at trial, will not be appreciated as 
such. (People v. Feliciano Jr) 
 
DESIGNATION OF OFFENSE 
The failure to designate the offense given by the 
statute or to mention the specific provision 
penalizing the act or an erroneous specification of 
the law violated does not vitiate the information if 
the facts alleged clearly recite the facts constituting 
the crime charged. What controls is not the title of 
the information or the designation of the 
offense, but the actual facts recited in the 
information. In other words, it is the recital of facts 
of the commission of the offense, not the 
nomenclature, that determines the crime being 
charged in the information. (Malto v. People) 
 
Another important rule in the allegation of or the 
recital of the acts or omissions in the body of the 
information – the specific acts of the accused do not 
have to be described in detail in the information as 
it is enough that the offense be described with 
sufficient particularity to make sure the accused 
fully understands what he is being charged with. 
The particularity must be such that a person of 
ordinary intelligence immediately knows what the 
charge is. Moreover, reasonable certainty of the 
crime suffices (Guy v. People). 
 
AVERMENT OF ACTS AND OMMISSIONS 
Q: what if the acts or omissions and the circumstances 
recited in the information are vague or ambiguous or it 
leads to a conclusion of two or more crimes being 
charged? 
A:  
1) If there is a designation of the offense or there 
is a section or subsection specified on what law 
is violated - the designation of the offense or 
the specification of the provision of law that is 
violated will control. 
2) If there is no designation of the offense or 
there is no specification of a section or 
subsection of a law that is violated and there is 
ambiguity in the recital of the acts or omissions 
in the body of the information, the remedies of 
the accused would be: 
 Ask a bill of particulars 
 File a motion to quash the information 
for failure to state or charge an offense 

--- PAGE 24 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
24 
 
Q: What is the main purpose of alleging in the 
information the elements constituting the offense? 
A: The main purpose of requiring the various elements 
of a crime to be set out in the information is to enable 
the accused to suitably prepare his defense because he 
is presumed to have no independent knowledge of 
the facts that constitute the offense 
 
SPECIFICATION OF QUALIFYING AND 
AGRRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 
1) Qualifying - changes the nature of the crime 
and thus increases the degree of the penalty 
2) Aggravating - changes the nature of the crime 
and thus increases the period of the imposable 
penalty 
 
A qualifying circumstance need not be preceded by 
descriptive words such as “qualifying” or “qualified 
by” to properly qualify an offense. It is not the use 
of the words “qualifying” or “qualified by” that 
raises a crime to a higher category, but the specific 
allegation of an attendant circumstance which adds 
the essential element raising the crime to a higher 
category. As regards aggravating circumstances, the 
mere statement of for example “with intent to kill 
qualified by treachery or evident premeditation and 
abuse of superior strength”, any which one of the 
aggravating circumstances in the RPC is not enough 
if the complaint or information fails to adequately 
describe the circumstances of the aggravating 
circumstances. It must be, in some way, described 
with sufficient particularity although the threshold 
of the specificity is just that an ordinary person of 
ordinary intelligence may immediately know what 
that particular allegation purports to be. (People v. Rosas) 
 
It is sufficient to allege conspiracy as a mode of 
commission of an offense in either of the following 
manners:  
1) By the use of the word “conspire” or is 
derivatives or synonyms such as 
“confederate”, “connive”, “collude”, etc.  
2) By allegation of basic facts constituting the 
conspiracy in a manner that a person of 
common understanding would know what 
was intended and with such precision that 
would enable the accused to competently 
enter a plea to a subsequent indictment of 
the same facts In the case cited, the words 
used to allege conspiracy is the phrase 
“participate in and facilitate” so 
according to the SC, the phrase “participate 
in and facilitate” is a clear and definite 
allegation of conspiracy sufficient for the 
accused to competently make a plea and 
make a proper defense. (Francisco v. 
People) 
 
The accused cannot be convicted of qualified rape 
even if it is proven during trial because the qualifying 
circumstance was not alleged in the information. 
(People v. Mendoza) 
 
During the course of the trial, the prosecution was 
able to prove that the dwelling of the subject of 
arson was inhabited. It could have qualified the 
arson, but it was not stated in the information that 
the dwelling was inhabited. Then the court cannot 
impose the penalty higher than that of arson since it 
cannot be qualified for failure to state the qualifying 
circumstance in the information. (Buebos v. People) 
 
The allegation that the offender is the victim’s uncle 
is not sufficient since the wordings of the statute 
provides that there must be an allegation that if it’s 
not within the specific list, there must be an 
allegation that the relative is the relative by 
consanguinity or affinity within the 3rd civil degree. 
(People v. Ubiña) 
 
The Supreme court said that it is not enough that in 
the recital of the information there are 3 accused. 
There should be a specification that the crime was 
committed by 2 or more persons. Aside from the 
general averment that there are 3 accused, there 
must be a special mention that it is qualified or is 
aggravated because it is committed by 2 or more 
persons. (People v. Alarcon) 
 
Supreme Court held further that even if you cannot 
premise the award of exemplary damages to the 
presence of aggravating circumstance, if the crime 
committed is highly reprehensible or outrageous 
conduct, then exemplary damages can also be 
awarded. (People v. Dalisay) 
 
The allegation in the Information that Maries was his 
minor daughter is as a matter of law insufficient to 
alert him as to the exact nature of the rape imputed 
to him. To do so would be to allege a conclusion of 
law to which the plea of not guilty joins no issue. Its 
effect is the same as alleging negligence without 
specifying the facts constituting such want of care or 
prudence. In the instant case, the exact age of the 
victim should have been asserted. Furthermore, 
the term minority is too technical to satisfy the 
pleading requirement that acts alleged as crime 
must be averred in a manner that a person of 
common understanding would understand the 
offense being charged. Certainly stating the words 
fifteen (15) years old, for example, in the 
information would signify something more familiar 
than the word minority could achieve. (People v. 
Mascarinas) 
 
REFERENCE AS TO SECTION OR 
SUBSECTION OF THE STATUTE 
Q: When can reference to the section or subsection of 
statute be alleged in the information? 
A: It is only when there is no specific name given to 
the offense that reference to the section or subsection 
of the statute punishing it may be made, and this 
actually applies to offenses under special laws 
 

--- PAGE 25 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
25 
Section 9. Cause of the accusation. — The acts or 
omissions complained of as constituting the offense 
and the qualifying and aggravating circumstances 
must be stated in ordinary and concise language and 
not necessarily in the language used in the statute but 
in terms sufficient to enable a person of common 
understanding to know what offense is being 
charged as well as its qualifying and aggravating 
circumstances and for the court to pronounce 
judgment. (9a) 
 
How to allege in the complaint or information 
1) must be stated in ordinary and concise 
language 
2) not necessarily in the language used in the 
statute but in terms sufficient to enable a 
person of common understanding to know 
what offense is being charged as well as its 
qualifying and aggravating circumstances and 
for the court to pronounce judgment 
 
This provision prescribes a manner by which acts or 
omissions as well as aggravating and qualifying 
circumstances should be alleged in the complaint or 
information. The main purpose of the requirement that 
the acts or omissions complained of as constituting an 
offense must be stated in ordinary and concise 
language is to enable a person of common 
understanding to know what the offense is intended to 
be charged so that he could suitably prepare for his 
defense. 
 
Section 9 of Rule 110 actually complements Rule 110 
Section 8 on the designation of the offense because in 
section 9 it specifies how you have to allege or to recite 
the acts and omissions constituting the crime being 
charged or the qualifying or aggravating circumstance. 
 
In People v. Mauricio, the Court elucidated: 
 
"The use of the word 'must' indicates that the 
requirement is mandatory, therefore failure to 
comply with Sec. 9, Rule 110, means that generic 
aggravating circumstances, although proven at the 
trial, cannot be appreciated against the accused if 
such circumstances are not stated in the information. 
It is a cardinal rule that rules of criminal procedure 
are given retroactive application insofar as they 
benefit the accused." (People v. Suela) 
 
The information must allege clearly and accurately 
the elements of the crime charged. The facts and 
circumstances are necessary to be included therein 
must be determined by reference to the definition 
and elements of the specific crimes being charged. 
(Serapio v. Sandiganbayan) 
 
Since the information did not specifically allege the 
circumstance that the victim was under PNP custody 
during the rape, the trial court cannot appreciate the 
qualifying circumstance and thus can only impose 
the penalty for simple rape. (People v. Aure) 
 
That the accused is the mother of the victim was not 
alleged, therefore it cannot be taken into 
consideration as a qualifying circumstance. (People v. Tampus) 
 
OTHER RULES 
Libel cases 
GR: information must set out the particular 
defamatory words verbatim and as published and that 
the statement of their substance is insufficient. 
XPN: may be cured by evidence presented in court 
XPN of XPN: accused objects the presentation of 
evidence 
 
Offenses in relation to public office 
GR: if the offense charged against a public officer is 
not one of those specifically mentioned under the 
Sandiganbayan law but comes under the offenses in 
general which may be committed in relation to 
public office, then a sufficient description of how that 
particular offense was committed in relation to office 
must be recited in the complaint or information. 
XPN: if the offense cannot be committed unless it 
is in relation to office. There is no necessity to 
specifically allege that it was indeed committed in 
relation to office. It will be a mere superfluity. 
 
Allegations of negativing exceptions 
1) Where the statute alleged to have been violated 
applies only to a specific class of persons and 
to special conditions, the complaint or 
information must allege facts establishing the 
accused falls within the specific class affected 
and not those exempted from the coverage of 
the law. Otherwise, the complaint or 
information is quashable for failure to state 
facts constituting an offense 
2) Where the statute penalizes generally the 
acts therein defined and is intended to 
apply to all persons indiscriminately 
although some special situations are excepted 
from its coverage, the complaint or 
information is sufficient even if it does not 
allege that the accused falls within the 
excepted situation for then the complete 
definition of the offense is entirely separable 
from the exceptions and can be made without 
reference to the latter. If it falls within the 
excepted class, the accused may raise is such 
fact as a defense. 
 
Q: What is the effect if the aggravating circumstance is 
alleged in the information? 
A: Award of exemplary damages is justified if an 
aggravating circumstance, either qualifying or generic, 
accompanies the crime 
 
Furthermore, in People v. Catubig, we held that while 
a non-alleged but proven aggravating 
circumstance cannot be used to increase the 
penalty, nonetheless it can be the source of civil 

--- PAGE 26 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
26 
awards. Hence, we retain the trial court's civil grants 
in this regard. (People v. Suela) 
 
Section 13. Duplicity of the offense. — A complaint or 
information must charge but one offense, except 
when the law prescribes a single punishment for 
various offenses. (13a) 
 
Duplicitous complaints or information 
Rule 
1) Complaint filed in court – duplicitous 
complaints apply 
2) Complaint filed to the prosecutor’s office - 
duplicitous complaints do not apply 
 
GR: The rule prohibits charging of two or more 
offenses in a single information has for its aim to give 
the defendant the necessary knowledge of the charge 
to enable him to prepare for his defense. The State shall 
not heap upon the defendant two or more charges 
which might confuse him in his defense 
XPN: when the law prescribes a single punishment for 
various offenses such as: 
1) Complex crime - a single act constitutes two or 
more grave or less grave felonies or when an 
offense is a necessary means in committing the 
other 
 Compound crime - a single act 
constitutes two or more grave or less 
grave felonies. 
 Complex crime proper - offense is a 
necessary means in the commission of 
the other 
 
Q: What is the requirement in case an accused is 
charged with a complex crime? 
A: The information charging a complex crime should 
allege each element of the component offenses with 
the same precision that would be necessary if they were 
made the subject of a separate prosecution 
 
2) Special complex crime - crimes specifically 
named or designated in special penal offenses 
or under the Revised Penal Code all of which 
are punished with one penalty 
 
Special complex 
crime 
Ordinary complex 
crimes 
specifically named or 
designated in special 
penal offenses or 
under the Revised 
Penal Code 
applies specifically to 
felonies defined 
under the Revised 
Penal Code and is 
governed by Article 
48 of the RPC 
 
3) Continuous crimes – (delito continuado), single 
larceny doctrine, a series of act arising from a 
single criminal intent. 
 
For delito continuado to exist there should be a 
plurality of acts performed during a period of 
time; unity of penal provision violated; and unity 
of criminal intent or purpose, which means that 
two or more violations of the same penal provisions 
are united in one and same instant or resolution 
leading to the perpetration of the same criminal 
purpose or aim (Santiago v. Garchitorena) 
 
Applying the concept of delito continuado, we 
treated as constituting only one offense the 
following cases: 
 
(1) The theft of 13 cows belonging to two different 
owners committed by the accused at the same time 
and at the same period of time (People v. Tumlos). 
(2) The theft of six roosters belonging to two 
different owners from the same coop and at the 
same period of time (People v. Jaranillo). 
(3) The theft of two roosters in the same place and 
on the same occasion (People v. De Leon). 
(4) The illegal charging of fees for services rendered 
by a lawyer every time he collects veteran's benefits 
on behalf of a client, who agreed that the attorney's 
fees shall be paid out of said benefits (People v. Sabbun). The collection of the legal fees were 
impelled by the same motive, that of collecting fees 
for services rendered, and all acts of collection were 
made under the same criminal impulse (People v. Lawas). 
 
On the other hand, we declined to apply the concept 
to the following cases: 
 
(1) Two estafa cases, one of which was committed 
during the period from January 19 to December 
1955 and the other from January 1956 to July 1956 
(People v. Dichupa). The said acts were committed 
on two different occasions. 
(2) Several malversations committed in May, June 
and July, 1936, and falsifications to conceal said 
offenses committed in August and October 1936. 
The malversations and falsifications "were not the 
result of only one purpose or of only one resolution 
to embezzle and falsify . . ." (People v. Cid). 
(3) Two estafa cases, one committed in December 
1963 involving the failure of the collector to turn 
over the installments for a radio and the other in 
June 1964 involving the pocketing of the 
installments for a sewing machine (People v. 
Ledesma). 
(4) 75 estafa cases committed by the conversion by 
the agent of collections from customers of the 
employer made on different dates (Gamboa v. 
Court of Appeals). (Santiago v. Garchitorena) 
 
The accused said that he cannot be charged with 
multiple rapes since the rapes occurred within just 
few minutes from each other. He argued that he was 
just motivated by a single criminal intent although 
there were breaks in between the several rapes he 
committed. The Supreme Court did not agree and 
held that when the accused would rest after carnal 
knowledge or after satisfying his lust upon the victim 
and within a sufficient time to regain his strength 
would do it again, to do the rape again the carnal 
knowledge to the victim, it can be inferred that the 
accused has decided to commit separate and distinct 

--- PAGE 27 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
27 
acts of rape and that he was not merely motivated by 
a single impulse but rather by several criminal 
intents. (People v. Lucena) 
 
XPN of XPN: if there will be double jeopardy 
 
Cases involving loose firearms 
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10591 
AN ACT PROVIDING FOR A 
COMPREHENSIVE LAW ON FIREARMS 
AND AMMUNITION AND PROVIDING 
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF 
SEC. 29. Use of Loose Firearm in the Commission of a Crime. 
– The use of a loose firearm, when inherent in the 
commission of a crime punishable under the Revised 
Penal Code or other special laws, shall be considered 
as an aggravating circumstance: Provided, That if 
the crime committed with the use of a loose firearm is 
penalized by the law with a maximum penalty which 
is lower than that prescribed in the preceding section 
for illegal possession of firearm, the penalty for illegal 
possession of firearm shall be imposed in lieu of 
the penalty for the crime charged: Provided, further, 
That if the crime committed with the use of a loose 
firearm is penalized by the law with a maximum 
penalty which is equal to that imposed under the 
preceding section for illegal possession of firearms, the 
penalty of prision mayor in its minimum period shall be 
imposed in addition to the penalty for the crime 
punishable under the Revised Penal Code or other 
special laws of which he/she is found guilty. 
 
If the violation of this Act is in furtherance of, or 
incident to, or in connection with the crime of 
rebellion of insurrection, or attempted coup d’ 
etat, such violation shall be absorbed as an element of 
the crime of rebellion or insurrection, or attempted 
coup d’ etat. 
 
If the crime is committed by the person without 
using the loose firearm, the violation of this Act shall 
be considered as a distinct and separate offense. 
 
SUMMARY: 
Penalties 
GR: The maximum penalty shall be imposed when the 
use of a loose firearm is inherent in the commission 
of a crime punishable under the Revised Penal Code 
or other special laws. 
XPNs: (PENALTY SHOULD BE WHICHEVER 
IS HIGHER BETWEEN RPC/SPECIAL LAW 
PENALTY AND PENALTY UNDER ILLEGAL 
POSSESSION OF FIREARMS) 
1) maximum penalty is lower than that prescribed 
in the preceding section for illegal possession 
of firearm - penalty for illegal possession of 
firearm shall be imposed  
2) maximum penalty which is equal to that 
imposed under the preceding section for illegal 
possession of firearms - penalty of prision 
mayor in its minimum period shall be 
imposed in addition to the penalty for the 
crime punishable under the Revised Penal 
Code or other special laws of which he/she 
is found guilty 
 
Other circumstances 
1) If the violation of this Act is in furtherance 
of, or incident to, or in connection with the 
crime of rebellion of insurrection, or 
attempted coup d’ etat - such violation shall 
be absorbed as an element of the crime of 
rebellion or insurrection, or attempted coup d’ 
etat. 
2) If the crime is committed by the person 
without using the loose firearm - the violation 
of this Act shall be considered as a distinct 
and separate offense. 
 
The Supreme Court said each illegal possession of a 
different type of firearm shall be prosecuted 
separately and not together since the law punishes 
the different type of firearm with a different penalty. 
It will not suffice to lump all the seized firearms in 
one information because the different penalties are 
imposed by law depending on the caliber of the 
weapon seized. To lump them altogether is 
duplicitous. (Fajardo v. People) 
 
Q: What is the effect of the failure to prove a complex 
crime?  
A: It is well settled that where a complex crime is 
charged and evidence fails to support the charge as to 
one of the component offenses, the defendant can be 
convicted only of the offense proved. 
 
Q: What is the remedy against a duplicitous 
information? A: Non-compliance with the Rule is a 
ground for the quashing of a duplicitous complaint or 
information under Rule 117 of the Revised Rules on 
Criminal Procedure. 
 
Waiver 
The failure to object to a duplicitous information 
before he enters his plea results in a waiver of the right 
to object to it and the court may thereafter convict him 
of as many offenses as are charged and proved, and 
impose on him the penalty for each offense setting out 
separately the findings of fact and law in each offense. 
 
Section 15. Place where action is to be instituted. — 
 
(a) Subject to existing laws, the criminal action shall 
be instituted and tried in the court of the 
municipality or territory where the offense was 
committed or where any of its essential ingredients 
occurred. 
(b) Where an offense is committed in a train, aircraft, 
or other public or private vehicle while in the course 
of its trip, the criminal action shall be instituted and 
tried in the court of any municipality or territory 
where such train, aircraft or other vehicle passed 
during such its trip, including the place of its 
departure and arrival. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
28 
(c) Where an offense is committed on board a vessel 
in the course of its voyage, the criminal action shall 
be instituted and tried in the court of the first port 
of entry or of any municipality or territory where the 
vessel passed during such voyage, subject to the 
generally accepted principles of international law. 
(d) Crimes committed outside the Philippines but 
punishable under Article 2 of the Revised Penal 
Code shall be cognizable by the court where the 
criminal action is first filed. (15a) 
 
Venue of criminal actions 
Venue does not only determine the place where the 
criminal action is to be constituted, but also the court 
which has jurisdiction to try and hear the case. When a 
court is found to have no jurisdiction over the territory, 
the case can be dismissed at any time. 
 
Two-Fold Reason for the Rule:  
1) The jurisdiction of the trial court is limited to 
well-defined territories, such that a trial court 
can only hear and try cases involving crimes 
committed within their territorial jurisdiction.  
2) Laying the venue in the locus criminis is 
grounded on the necessity and justice of having 
an accused on trial in the municipality or 
province where witnesses and other facilities 
for his defense are available 
 
1ST PARAGRAPH 
GR: criminal action shall be instituted and tried in the 
court of the municipality or territory where the offense 
was committed or where any of its essential 
ingredients occurred. 
XPN: Subject to existing laws 
 
Original cases which are 
cognizable by the 
Sandiganbayan 
GR: Place where the 
said court sits or holds 
its sessions. 
 
XPN: when the greater 
convenience of the 
accused and the 
witnesses or other 
compelling 
considerations require a 
case originating from 
one geographical region 
may be heard in another 
geographical region 
Cases affecting 
ambassadors, public 
ministers, and consuls 
within the concurrent 
original jurisdiction of 
the Supreme Court and 
Regional Trial Courts. 
Libel cases subject of special rules 
of venue under Article 
360 of the RPC 
 
1) Whether the 
offended party is a 
public official or a 
private person, the 
criminal action may 
be filed in the Court 
of First Instance of 
the province or city 
where the libelous 
article is printed and 
first published. 
2) If the offended 
party is a private 
individual, the 
criminal action may 
also be filed in the 
Court of First 
Instance of the 
province where he 
actually resided at 
the time of the 
commission of the 
offense. 
3) If the offended 
party is a public 
officer whose office 
is in Manila at the 
time of the 
commission of the 
offense, the action 
may be filed in the 
Court of First 
Instance of Manila. 
4) If the offended 
party is a public 
officer holding 
office outside of 
Manila, the action 
may be filed in the 
Court of First 
Instance of the 
province or city 
where he held office 
at the time of the 
commission of the 
offense. (Agbayani 
v. Sayo) 
A criminal action arising 
from Illegal Recruitment 
1) RTC of the province 
or city where the 
offense was 
committed OR  
2) where the offended 
party actually resides 
at the time of the 
commission of the 
offense. 
Perjury where the untruthful 
statement under oath 
was made and not 
where it was used 
BP 22 Continuous crime 
 
filed in any of the places 
where the elements of 
the offense occurred, 
that is, where the check 
is issued, delivered, 
drawn, or dishonored 
Estafa by postdating or 
issuing a bad check 
Continuous crime 
 

--- PAGE 29 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
29 
filed in any of the places 
where the elements of 
the offense occurred 
Theft Not a continuous crime 
 
filed where the crime of 
theft was consummated 
Cybercrime law 1)  Designated 
cybercrime court of 
the province or city 
where the offense or 
any of its elements is 
committed 
2) Where any part of 
the computer system 
used is situated 
3) Where any of the 
damage caused to a 
juridical or natural 
person took place  
 
The court where the 
criminal action is first 
filed shall acquire 
jurisdiction to the 
exclusion of other 
courts 
Criminal action 
involving public officials 
falling under the 
jurisdiction of RTC 
In a judicial region other 
than where the official 
holds office 
 
The first place where the material was accessed 
cannot be equated with “printing and first 
publication” (Bonifacio v. RTC) 
 
The allegations in the Information that "Panay 
News, a daily publication with a considerable 
circulation in the City of Iloilo and throughout the 
region" only showed that Iloilo was the place where 
Panay News was in considerable circulation but did 
not establish that the said publication was printed 
and first published in Iloilo City. (Foz v. People) 
 
2nd PARAGRAPH 
RULE: Where an offense is committed in a train, 
aircraft, or other public or private vehicle while in the 
course of its trip, the criminal action shall be instituted 
and tried 
1) in the court of any municipality or territory 
where such train, aircraft or other vehicle 
passed during such trip 
2) including the place of its departure and 
arrival. 
 
Carnapping - is a continuing crime. Section 15(b) shall 
apply 
 
3RD PARAGRAPH 
GR: Where an offense is committed on board a vessel 
in the course of its voyage, the criminal action shall be 
instituted and tried  
1) in the court of the first port of entry or  
2) of any municipality or territory where the 
vessel passed during such voyage 
XPN: subject to the generally accepted principles of 
international law 
 crimes in the high seas – jurisdiction is 
determined by the place of registration 
of the vessel 
 
4th PARAGRAPH 
RULE: Crimes committed outside the Philippines but 
punishable under Article 2 of the Revised Penal Code 
shall be cognizable by the court where the criminal 
action is first filed. Once it is filed there, it is to the 
exclusion of all other courts. 
 
 Philippine ship or 
airship 
Foreign ship or 
airship 
WITHIN 
JURISDICTION 
TRIABLE 
(TERRITORIALITY) 
TRIABLE 
(TERRITORIALITY) 
XPN: war ships – 
considered an extension 
of the country 
OUTSIDE 
JURISDICTION 
TRIABLE 
(EXTRATERRITORIALITY) 
NOT TRIABLE 
WITHIN 
JURISDICTION OF 
ANOTHER 
COUNTRY 
ENGLISH RULE NOT TRIABLE 
 
*EEZ - considered not as territory of the Philippines, 
but as high seas 
 
Power of the SC to change venue or place 
Section 5 (4) Article VIII, 1987 Constitution 
SECTION 5. The Supreme Court shall have the 
following powers:  
xxx 
4) Order a change of venue or place of trial to avoid 
a miscarriage of justice. 
 
In applying the standards of miscarriage of justice, the 
Court will evaluate which court would be in a better 
position to serve the interest of justice, taking into 
account  
1) The nature of the controversy;  
2) Accessibility of the court to the parties; and  
3) Other similar factor 
 
Venue for CICL 
Age of criminal responsibility: above 15 but below 18 
years old *who committed an offense with 
discernment 
 
Sec. 23 of the 2019 SC Revised Rule on CICL provides, 
subject the provision of Sec. 15, Rule 110 of the 
Revised Rules on Criminal Procedure, any criminal or 
civil action involving a CICL shall be instituted and 
tried  
1) in the appropriate court nearest the place 
where the offense was committed or  
2) where any of its essential elements occurred 
 
Section 14. Amendment or substitution. — A complaint 
or information may be amended, in form or in 
substance, without leave of court, at any time before 
the accused enters his plea. After the plea and during 
the trial, a formal amendment may only be made 

--- PAGE 30 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
30 
with leave of court and when it can be done without 
causing prejudice to the rights of the accused. 
 
However, any amendment before plea, which 
downgrades the nature of the offense charged in or 
excludes any accused from the complaint or 
information, can be made only upon motion by the 
prosecutor, with notice to the offended party and 
with leave of court. The court shall state its reasons 
in resolving the motion and copies of its order shall 
be furnished all parties, especially the offended party. 
(n) 
 
If it appears at any time before judgment that a 
mistake has been made in charging the proper 
offense, the court shall dismiss the original 
complaint or information upon the filing of a new 
one charging the proper offense in accordance with 
section 19, Rule 119, provided the accused shall not 
be placed in double jeopardy. The court may require 
the witnesses to give bail for their appearance at the 
trial. (14a) 
 
Amendment or substitution 
AMENDMENT 
Before plea After plea 
1) Formal amendments 
2) Substantial 
amendments 
1) Formal amendments 
GR: Without leave of 
court 
XPNs: 
1) Any amendment 
which downgrades 
the nature of the 
offense charged in 
2) excludes any accused 
from the complaint 
or information 
 
Must be with leave of 
court + motion of the 
prosecutor + notice to 
the offended party 
With leave of court if it 
can be done without 
causing prejudice to the 
rights of the accused 
 
Q: What is the TEST to determine whether or not an 
accused will be prejudiced by an amendment? 
A: The test as to when the rights of an accused are 
prejudiced with the amendment of the complaint or 
information is when the defense under the 
complaint or information as originally stood will 
no longer be available after the amendment is 
made, and when any evidence the accused might 
have would be inapplicable to the complaint or 
information as amended. 
 
Amendment – refers to the modification of a 
complaint or information by the public prosecutor 
which changes its form or substance. It can be: 
1) Formal – does not change the nature of the 
offense 
2) Substantial – changes the nature of the offense 
 
Formal amendments  
Gabionsa v CA 
1) It does not deprive the accused of the right to 
invoke prescription; 
2) It does not affect or alter the nature of the 
offense originally charged 
3) It does not involve a change in the basic theory 
of the prosecution so as to require the accused 
to undergo any material change or 
modification in his defense. 
4) It does not expose the accused to a charge 
which would call for a higher penalty; and 
5) It does not cause surprise nor deprive the 
accused of an opportunity to meet the new 
averment 
Ricarze v. CA 
6) New allegations which relate only to the range 
of penalty that the court may impose in the 
event of a conviction; 
7) An amendment which does not charge another 
offense different or distinct from that charged 
in the original one; 
8) Additional allegation which does not alter the 
prosecution's theory of the case so as to cause 
surprise to the accused and affect the form of 
defense he has or will assume; 
9) An amendment which does not adversely 
affect any substantial right of the accused; and 
10) An amendment that merely adds specifications 
to eliminate vagueness in the information and 
not to introduce new and material facts and 
merely state with additional precision 
something which is already contained in the 
original information, and which adds nothing 
essential for conviction for the crime charged. 
Pacoy v. Judge Cajigal 
11) Amendment to change the designation of the 
offense from homicide to murder - based on 
the facts and the circumstances of this case, 
what was originally charged was actually 
murder. 
Almeda v. Judge Villaluz 
12) Adding of the allegation of habitual 
delinquency and recidivism in the original 
information involving qualified theft - only 
changes the penalty which later on may be 
imposed on the accused 
Tehankee v. Madayag 
13) From frustrated murder to murder 
Buhat v. CA 
14) additional allegation of conspiracy where the 
participation of the accused as a principal 
 
Substantial amendments 
1) An amendment which changes the manner of 
the commission of the offense  
2) An amendment which changes the name of the 
offended party in cases where the identity of 
the offended party is an element or is a 
necessary ingredient of the crime charged 
3) An amendment to change the date of the 
commission of the offense over a wide span 

--- PAGE 31 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
31 
of time (more than 3 years). So long as it is 
within the range of the change in the date, then 
it will just be considered as a formal 
amendment 
4) An amendment for the purpose of making the 
information charge an offense when the 
original information does not charge any 
offense. 
5) An amendment which changes the fact or 
ground of responsibility of the accused. 
Montenegro v. People 
6) From robbery to robbery in an uninhabited 
place 
People v. Sandoval 
7) Amendment in the relationship of the accused 
to the victim in rape cases 
 
Objection to the information or complaint must be 
placed at the time the amendment is made, 
otherwise, accused silence would be deemed consent 
on his part to the amendment. (People v. Janairo) 
 
A careful scrutiny of the rule on amendment, 
although it uses singular word complaint or 
information it doesn’t mean that two or more 
complaints or information cannot be amended into 
only one information. Surely, such could not have 
been intended by the SC. Otherwise, there can be an 
absurd situation where two or more complaints or 
information could no longer be amended into one 
information (Fronda-Baggao v. People) 
 
SUBSTITUTION 
If it appears at any time before judgment that a 
mistake has been made in charging the proper 
offense, the court shall dismiss the original 
complaint or information upon the filing of a 
new one charging the proper offense in 
accordance with section 19, Rule 119, provided the 
accused shall not be placed in double jeopardy. The 
court may require the witnesses to give bail for their 
appearance at the trial. (14a) 
 
RULE 119 
Sec. 19. When mistake has been made in charging the proper 
offense. – When it becomes manifest at any time 
before judgment that a mistake has been made in 
charging the proper offense and the accused 
cannot be convicted of the offense charged or 
any other offense necessarily included therein, 
the accused shall not be discharged if there 
appears good cause to detain him. In such case, 
the court shall commit the accused to answer for the 
proper offense and dismiss the original case upon 
the filing of the proper information.  
 
There can only be a substitution of the offense charged 
is wholly different from the offense that is proven. If 
not wholly different, there may be double jeopardy.  
 
When substitution is proper, the court will dismiss the 
original charge or the original information only upon 
the filing of the new information charging the proper 
offense. 
 
Test in determining the identity of the offenses  
There is an identity between the two offenses  
1) when the evidences to support a conviction 
of one offense would be sufficient to 
warrant a conviction to the other or  
2) when the second offense is exactly the 
same as the first or  
3) when the second offense is an attempt to 
commit or frustration of or when it 
necessarily includes or necessarily 
included in the offense charged in the 
first information 
 
Amendment Substitution 
May be made before or after the defendant pleads 
May involve formal or 
substantial changes 
Necessarily involves a 
substantial change 
(wholly different) from 
the original charge 
GR: Without leave of 
court 
XPNs: 
3) Any amendment 
which downgrades 
the nature of the 
offense charged in 
4) excludes any accused 
from the complaint 
or information 
 
Must be with leave of 
court + motion of the 
prosecutor + notice to 
the offended party 
Substitution of 
information must always 
be with leave of court as 
the original information 
has to be dismissed. 
Where the amendment is 
only as to form, there is 
no need to another 
preliminary investigation 
The retaking of the plea 
of the accused in 
substitution of 
information, another 
preliminary investigation 
is entailed and accused 
has to plead anew the 
new information 
An amended 
information refers to the 
same offense charge in 
the original information 
or to an offense which 
necessarily includes or is 
necessarily included in 
the original charge. 
Substitution requires or 
presupposes that the 
new information 
involves a different 
offense which does not 
include or is not 
necessarily included in 
the original charge, 
hence, the accused 
cannot claim double 
jeopardy 
 
RULE 111 
PROSECUTION OF CIVIL ACTION 
 
Section 1. Institution of criminal and civil actions. — (a) 
When a criminal action is instituted, the civil action 
for the recovery of civil liability arising from the 
offense charged shall be deemed instituted with the 
criminal action unless the offended party waives the 

--- PAGE 32 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
32 
civil action, reserves the right to institute it separately 
or institutes the civil action prior to the criminal 
action. 
 
The reservation of the right to institute separately 
the civil action shall be made before the prosecution 
starts presenting its evidence and under 
circumstances affording the offended party a 
reasonable opportunity to make such reservation. 
 
When the offended party seeks to enforce civil 
liability against the accused by way of moral, 
nominal, temperate, or exemplary damages without 
specifying the amount thereof in the complaint or 
information, the filing fees thereof shall constitute a 
first lien on the judgment awarding such damages. 
 
Where the amount of damages, other than actual, is 
specified in the complaint or information, the 
corresponding filing fees shall be paid by the 
offended party upon the filing thereof in court. 
 
Except as otherwise provided in these Rules, no 
filing fees shall be required for actual damages. 
 
No counterclaim, cross-claim or third-party 
complaint may be filed by the accused in the criminal 
case, but any cause of action which could have been 
the subject thereof may be litigated in a separate civil 
action. (1a) 
 
(b) The criminal action for violation of Batas 
Pambansa Blg. 22 shall be deemed to include the 
corresponding civil action. No reservation to file 
such civil action separately shall be allowed. 
 
Upon filing of the aforesaid joint criminal and civil 
actions, the offended party shall pay in full the filing 
fees based on the amount of the check involved, 
which shall be considered as the actual damages 
claimed. Where the complaint or information also 
seeks to recover liquidated, moral, nominal, 
temperate or exemplary damages, the offended party 
shall pay additional filing fees based on the amounts 
alleged therein. If the amounts are not so alleged but 
any of these damages are subsequently awarded by 
the court, the filing fees based on the amount 
awarded shall constitute a first lien on the judgment. 
 
Where the civil action has been filed separately and 
trial thereof has not yet commenced, it may be 
consolidated with the criminal action upon 
application with the court trying the latter case. If the 
application is granted, the trial of both actions shall 
proceed in accordance with section 2 of this Rule 
governing consolidation of the civil and criminal 
actions. (cir. 57-97) 
 
Two aspects of a criminal action 
1) Criminal 
2) Civil – civil liability ex delicto 
 
Civil liability ex delicto 
Art. 104. What is included in civil liability. — The civil 
liability established in Articles 100, 101, 102, and 103 
of this Code includes: 
1) Restitution; 
2) Reparation of the damage caused; 
3) Indemnification for consequential damages. 
 
The substantive basis for this two-pronged aspect of a 
criminal action is Article 100 of the Revised Penal 
Code. 
 
Art. 100. Civil liability of a person guilty of felony. — 
Every person criminally liable for a felony is also 
civilly liable. 
 
GR: When a criminal action is instituted, the civil 
action for the recovery of civil liability arising from the 
offense charged shall be deemed instituted with the 
criminal action 
 
XPN:  
1) When the offended party waives the civil action 
2) When he reserves the right to institute the civil 
action separately –  
Purpose: The purpose of this rule requiring 
reservation is to prevent the offended party 
from recovering damages twice for the same 
act or omission 
Effect: loses his right to intervene in the 
prosecution of the criminal case for this reason 
he no longer has any right nor should he be 
expected to move for reconsideration of much 
less appeal from the decision in the criminal 
case insofar as it decides the question of civil 
indemnity 
3) When he institutes the civil action prior to the 
criminal action  
Effect: The effect of the institution of the civil 
action prior to the criminal action is that the 
private offended party has abandoned his right 
to press recovery for the civil liability ex delicto 
in the criminal case and has opted instead to 
recover them in a separate civil action. 
4) When the civil action is based on Article 32, 33, 
34 and 2176 of the Civil Code otherwise 
known as independent civil action 
Effect: the offended party can file two separate 
suit for the same act or omission.  
1) The first is a criminal case where the civil 
action to recover civil liability ex delicto is 
deemed instituted.  
2) And the other is a civil case for the quasi-
delict without violating the rule on non-
forum shopping. 
 
No reservation allowed 
1) The civil action arising from violation of Batas 
Pambansa Blg. 22. 
XPN: The following are allowed 
 To waive civil action ex delicto in 
relation to the BP 22 case 2.  

--- PAGE 33 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
33 
 To file the civil action in relation to BP 
22 case prior to the institution of the 
criminal action for BP 22. 
 
When you file the BP 22 case, since the civil liability 
ex delicto is deemed instituted, the civil case that you 
filed prior will be dismissible. It has to be litigated in 
the criminal action because of the rules that provides 
that the civil liability ex delicto is deemed instituted 
in the BP 22 case. 
 
The proper action would be to consolidate the 
previously filed civil action in relation to the action 
in the B.P. 22 case and consolidate it to the criminal 
action that was subsequently filed. (Hyatt 
Industrial v. Asia Dynamic) 
 
There can be no separate, independent civil action 
grounded on fraud but the allegation is the violation 
of B.P. 22 because of the rule that the civil liability 
ex delicto is deemed instituted in the criminal action, 
there is no reservation allowed. Even an 
independent civil action even if phrased as fraud, as 
provided under Article 33 of the Civil Code, the case 
will not be allowed because essentially it would still 
be recovery of the amount subject to B.P. 22 case. 
(Heirs of Simon v. Chan) 
 
2) The civil action for the recovery of civil liability 
arising from cases falling under the jurisdiction 
of the Sandiganbayan or other appropriate 
courts involving public officers. 
3) The civil action for the recovery of the civil 
liability for taxes and penalties in criminal 
offenses arising from violations of the National 
Internal Revenue Code (NIRC) or Tariff and 
Customs Code and other laws administered by 
the Bureau of Internal Revenue or Bureau of 
Customs 
 
Filing fees and other damages 
Filing fees 
GR: Actual damages – no filing fees 
XPN: BP 22 - Upon filing of the aforesaid joint 
criminal and civil actions, the offended party shall pay 
in full the filing fees based on the amount of the 
check involved, which shall be considered as the 
actual damages claimed. 
 
Indemnification for consequential damages 
1) Moral 
2) Exemplary 
3) Nominal 
4) Temperate 
5) Actual 
 
GR: To all other cases, when the offended party seeks 
to enforce civil liability against the accused by way of 
moral, nominal, temperate, or exemplary damages 
without specifying the amount thereof in the complaint 
or information, the filing fees thereof shall constitute 
a first lien on the judgment awarding such 
damages. 
XPN: the damages is specified in amount and the 
other damages were eventually given to the court but 
there was no specification in the complaint or 
information - the corresponding filing fee shall be paid 
by the offended party upon the filing thereof in court. 
 
Rule in BP 22 cases 
1) The actual damages is the amount that it 
reflected in the check subject of the BP 22 case 
- there is corresponding filing fees in BP 22 
cases. 
2) if nominal damages, moral damages, temperate 
damages or exemplary damages are specifically 
alleged with specific amount - pay the 
corresponding filing fees at the start or at the 
institution of the criminal action 
3) if nominal damages, moral damages, temperate 
damages or exemplary damages are specifically 
alleged without specific amount - after the 
award is granted, the filing fees, based on the 
amount awarded shall constitute as a first lien 
on the judgment 
 
Damages when death occurs 
In relation to the award of damages when death occurs 
as a result of the crime, the heirs of the deceased are 
entitled to the following items of damages:  
1) Indemnity for the death of the victim of the 
offense;  
2) Indemnity for the loss of earning capacity of 
the deceased;  
3) Moral damages for mental anguish;  
4) Exemplary damages; and  
5) Attorney’s fees and expenses of litigation. 
6) Interest may also be granted by the court in 
proper cases. 
 
Counterclaim, cross-claim or third-party 
complaint 
No counterclaim, cross-claim or third-party 
complaint may be filed by the accused in the criminal 
case, but any cause of action which could have been 
the subject thereof may be litigated in a separate civil 
action. 
 
Counterclaim - any claim which a defending party 
may have against an opposing party 
Cross-claim – any claim of a certain amount or the 
whole amount or a course of action against co-
defendant 
Third-party complaint - a claim that it, if any, party 
may with leave of court file against a person, not a party 
to the action called a third party defendant for 
contribution, indemnity, subrogation or any other 
relief in respect of his or her opponents’ claim. 
 
Counterclaim, cross claim, third party complaint the 
course of action of the offender or the accused can 

--- PAGE 34 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
34 
proceed simultaneously and independently of the 
criminal action. 
 
Consolidation of the civil and criminal actions 
A situation wherein the civil action is filed separately in 
the trial of the civil action has not yet commenced. 
It may then be consolidated with the criminal action 
upon application with a court trying the latter case. 
 
Section 2. When separate civil action is suspended. — 
After the criminal action has been commenced, the 
separate civil action arising therefrom cannot be 
instituted until final judgment has been entered in 
the criminal action. 
 
If the criminal action is filed after the said civil action 
has already been instituted, the latter shall be 
suspended in whatever stage it may be found before 
judgment on the merits. The suspension shall last 
until final judgment is rendered in the criminal 
action. Nevertheless, before judgment on the merits 
is rendered in the civil action, the same may, upon 
motion of the offended party, be consolidated with 
the criminal action in the court trying the criminal 
action. In case of consolidation, the evidence already 
adduced in the civil action shall be deemed 
automatically reproduced in the criminal action 
without prejudice to the right of the prosecution to 
cross-examine the witnesses presented by the 
offended party in the criminal case and of the parties 
to present additional evidence. The consolidated 
criminal and civil actions shall be tried and decided 
jointly. 
 
During the pendency of the criminal action, the 
running of the period of prescription of the civil 
action which cannot be instituted separately or 
whose proceeding has been suspended shall be 
tolled. (n) 
 
The extinction of the penal action does not carry 
with it extinction of the civil action. However, the 
civil action based on delict shall be deemed 
extinguished if there is a finding in a final judgment 
in the criminal action that the act or omission from 
which the civil liability may arise did not exist. (2a) 
 
Commencement of criminal or civil action 
1) Criminal      Separate civil action - cannot be 
instituted until final judgment has been entered 
in the criminal action 
2) Separate civil action          Criminal - the latter 
shall be suspended in whatever state it may be 
found before judgment on the merits. The 
suspension shall last until final judgment is 
rendered in the criminal action. 
 
Reliefs while the civil action is suspended 
1) consolidate the civil action in the criminal 
action Effects:  
 the evidence already adduced in the 
civil action shall be deemed 
automatically reproduced in the 
criminal action  
 right of the prosecution to cross-
examine the witnesses presented by the 
offended party in the criminal case  
 right to present additional evidence. 
2) power to issue preliminary and auxiliary writs 
such as preliminary injunction, attachment, 
appointment of a receiver, fixing the amount 
of bonds to be filed, and other processes of 
similar nature none of which goes into the 
merits of the case 
3) During the pendency of the criminal action, the 
running period of prescription of the civil 
action which cannot be instituted separately or 
whose proceeding has been suspended shall be 
tolled. 
 
Application 
The rule does not apply to the civil action arising from 
other sources of obligations: law, quasi-delict, quasi-
contract because this can proceed independently of 
criminal action 
1) The independent civil actions in cases under 
Art 32,33, 34 and 2176 of Civil Code because 
you can file this independently, you do not 
have to wait for the criminal action to attain 
finality status. 
2) If the case of separate civil action involves a 
prejudicial question determinative of whether 
the criminal action may proceed or not. 
3) When the civil case is subsequently 
consolidated in the criminal action under this 
section of Rule 111. 
4) When the civil action does not seek to enforce 
civil liability arising from the offenses such as 
civil action for legal separation arising from the 
crime of concubinage 
5) When the civil action is ex contractu and not 
ex delicto, or is based on quasi-delict 
 
Extinction 
GR: The extinction of the penal action does not 
carry with it extinction of the civil action. 
Extinguishment of criminal action 
1) The death of the accused  
2) Dismissal of the criminal action  
XPN: civil action based on delict shall be deemed 
extinguished if there is a finding in a final judgment in 
the criminal action that the act or omission from which 
the civil liability may arise did not exist. 
1) Acquittal of the accused 
 Acquittal on the ground that the 
accused is not the author of the act or 
omission complained of. 
XPN of XPN: 
1) Acquittal is one based on reasonable doubt on 
the guilt of the accused. 
2) Where the court expressly declares that the 
liability of the accused is not criminal but only 
civil in nature.  

--- PAGE 35 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
35 
3) Where the civil liability is not derived from or 
based on the criminal act on which the accused 
is acquitted. 
 
Q: What are the effects of the extinction of civil 
liability to the criminal action? 
A: A judge cannot dismiss a criminal case because the 
civil liability has been paid. While there may be a 
compromise upon civil liability arising from the 
offense, such compromise shall not extinguish the 
public action for the imposition of legal penalty. 
Payment is actually not one of the modes of 
extinguishing criminal liability. 
 
Q: What is the effect on judgement in a civil case 
absolving the defendant to the criminal case? 
A: A final judgement rendered in a civil action 
absolving the defendant from civil liability is not a bar 
to a criminal action for the same act or omission 
subject of the civil action. 
 
Q: What is the effect of the acquittal of the accused to 
his administrative case? 
A: Even if the accused is acquitted in his criminal case, 
it does not absolve him in his administrative case. The 
threshold in admin cases is only substantial evidence or 
a scintilla of proof or reasonable evidence that will 
support a conclusion. 
 
Section 3. When civil action may proceeded independently. 
— In the cases provided for in Articles 32, 33, 34 
and 2176 of the Civil Code of the Philippines, the 
independent civil action may be brought by the 
offended party. It shall proceed independently of the 
criminal action and shall require only a 
preponderance of evidence. In no case, however, 
may the offended party recover damages twice for 
the same act or omission charged in the criminal 
action. (3a) 
 
Independent civil actions 
1) the failure to make a reservation in the criminal 
action, i.e. to file separately any of this action 
provided under Article 32, 33, 34 and 2176, is 
not a waiver of the right to file a separate civil 
action based on this Articles of the Civil Code 
2) civil actions not based on the criminal actions 
3) the grant under Articles 32, 33, 34 and 2176 of 
the Civil Code are substantive in nature, this is 
part of substantive law therefore the right to 
file the same cannot be diminished, increased 
or modified by the Rules of Court without 
offending the Constitution. 
4) an independent civil action separately and 
independently simultaneous with the criminal 
action. That is on top of the civil liability ex 
delicto which may be prosecuted or 
deemed instituted in the criminal action. 
 
Article 32. Any public officer or employee, or any 
private individual, who directly or indirectly 
obstructs, defeats, violates or in any manner impedes 
or impairs any of the following rights and liberties of 
another person shall be liable to the latter for 
damages: 
 
(1) Freedom of religion; 
(2) Freedom of speech; 
(3) Freedom to write for the press or to maintain a 
periodical publication; 
(4) Freedom from arbitrary or illegal detention; 
(5) Freedom of suffrage; 
(6) The right against deprivation of property without 
due process of law; 
(7) The right to a just compensation when private 
property is taken for public use; 
(8) The right to the equal protection of the laws; 
(9) The right to be secure in one's person, house, 
papers, and effects against unreasonable searches 
and seizures; 
(10) The liberty of abode and of changing the same; 
(11) The privacy of communication and 
correspondence; 
(12) The right to become a member of associations 
or societies for purposes not contrary to law; 
(13) The right to take part in a peaceable assembly to 
petition the Government for redress of grievances; 
(14) The right to be a free from involuntary servitude 
in any form; 
(15) The right of the accused against excessive bail; 
(16) The right of the accused to be heard by himself 
and counsel, to be informed of the nature and cause 
of the accusation against him, to have a speedy and 
public trial, to meet the witnesses face to face, and 
to have compulsory process to secure the attendance 
of witness in his behalf; 
(17) Freedom from being compelled to be a witness 
against one's self, or from being forced to confess 
guilt, or from being induced by a promise of 
immunity or reward to make such confession, except 
when the person confessing becomes a State 
witness; 
(18) Freedom from excessive fines, or cruel and 
unusual punishment, unless the same is imposed or 
inflicted in accordance with a statute which has not 
been judicially declared unconstitutional; and 
(19) Freedom of access to the courts. 
 
In any of the cases referred to in this article, whether 
or not the defendant's act or omission constitutes a 
criminal offense, the aggrieved party has a right to 
commence an entirely separate and distinct civil 
action for damages, and for other relief. Such civil 
action shall proceed independently of any criminal 
prosecution (if the latter be instituted), and may be 
proved by a preponderance of evidence. 
 
The indemnity shall include moral damages. 
Exemplary damages may also be adjudicated. 
 
The responsibility herein set forth is not demandable 
from a judge unless his act or omission constitutes a 
violation of the Penal Code or other penal statute. 
 
Article 33. In cases of defamation, fraud, and 
physical injuries a civil action for damages, entirely 
separate and distinct from the criminal action, may 
be brought by the injured party. Such civil action 

--- PAGE 36 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
36 
shall proceed independently of the criminal 
prosecution, and shall require only a preponderance 
of evidence. 
 
Article 34. When a member of a city or municipal 
police force refuses or fails to render aid or 
protection to any person in case of danger to life or 
property, such peace officer shall be primarily liable 
for damages, and the city or municipality shall be 
subsidiarily responsible therefor. The civil action 
herein recognized shall be independent of any 
criminal proceedings, and a preponderance of 
evidence shall suffice to support such action. 
 
Article 2176. Quasi-Delict. Whoever by act or 
omission causes damages to another, there being 
fault or negligence is oblige to pay for the damage 
done. Such fault or negligence is if there is no pre-
existing contractual relation between the parties is 
called quasidelict is governed by the provisions of 
Chapter 2, Title XVII of the Civil Code. 
 
Under here, same act or omission can create two kinds 
of liability on the part of the offender; that is:  
1) civil liability ex delicto such as reckless 
imprudence resulting to homicide and/or 
damage to property; and  
2) liable for quasi-delict or civil liability under Art. 
2176 of Civil Code. 
 
Section 4. Effect of death on civil actions. — The death 
of the accused after arraignment and during the 
pendency of the criminal action shall extinguish the 
civil liability arising from the delict. However, the 
independent civil action instituted under section 3 of 
this Rule or which thereafter is instituted to enforce 
liability arising from other sources of obligation may 
be continued against the estate or legal 
representative of the accused after proper 
substitution or against said estate, as the case may be. 
The heirs of the accused may be substituted for the 
deceased without requiring the appointment of an 
executor or administrator and the court may appoint 
a guardian ad litem for the minor heirs. 
 
The court shall forthwith order said legal 
representative or representatives to appear and be 
substituted within a period of thirty (30) days from 
notice. 
 
A final judgment entered in favor of the offended 
party shall be enforced in the manner especially 
provided in these rules for prosecuting claims 
against the estate of the deceased. 
 
If the accused dies before arraignment, the case shall 
be dismissed without prejudice to any civil action the 
offended party may file against the estate of the 
deceased. (n) 
 
Effects of death to criminal actions 
Art. 89. How criminal liability is totally extinguished. — 
Criminal liability is totally extinguished: 
1) By the death of the convict, as to the personal 
penalties and as to pecuniary penalties, liability 
therefor is extinguished only when the death of 
the offender occurs before final judgment. 
xxx 
 
Effects to civil actions 
 
DEPENDENT ACTIONS 
To civil actions: EXTINGUISHED 
1) Purely person action - The death of a party will 
completely extinguish the claim or the action 
which is purely personal 
2) Civil Actions involving the performance that 
cannot be purely delegated 
3) Claims that cannot be instituted by the 
executor or administrator of the deceased 
person 
 
NOT EXTINGUISHED  
1) Recovery of contractual money, (based on 
contracts)  
2) Recovery or protection of property rights, 
3) Recovery of real and personal property or 
interest,  
4) Enforcement of a lien,  
5) Recovery of damages to injury of a person of 
property and suits by reason of the alleged 
tortuous acts of the defendant, and (torts and 
quasi-delicts)  
6) Ejectment cases 
 
INDEPENDENT CIVIL ACTIONS 
NOT EXTINGUISHED 
1) . It shall be the duty of his counsel to inform 
the court within 30 days after such death of the 
fact thereof and give the names and addresses 
of his legal representative/s 
2) The failure of the counsel to comply is a 
ground for disciplinary action. 
 
1. Death of the accused pending appeal of his 
conviction extinguishes his criminal liability as 
well as the civil liability based solely thereon. As 
opined by Justice Regalado, in this regard, "the death 
of the accused prior to final judgment terminates his 
criminal liability and only the civil liability directly 
arising from and based solely on the offense 
committed, i.e., civil liability ex delicto in senso 
strictiore." 
2. Corollarily, the claim for civil liability survives 
notwithstanding the death of accused, if the same 
may also be predicated on a source of obligation 
other than delict. Article 1157 of the Civil Code 
enumerates these other sources of obligation from 
which the civil liability may arise as a result of the 
same act or omission: 
a) Law  
b) Contracts 
c) Quasi-contracts 
d) . . . 
e) Quasi-delicts 
 

--- PAGE 37 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
37 
3. Where the civil liability survives, as explained in 
Number 2 above, an action for recovery therefor 
may be pursued but only by way of filing a 
separate civil action and subject to Section 1, 
Rule 111 of the 1985 Rules on Criminal 
Procedure as amended. This separate civil action 
may be enforced either against the 
executor/administrator or the estate of the accused, 
depending on the source of obligation upon which 
the same is based as explained above. 
4. Finally, the private offended party need not fear a 
forfeiture of his right to file this separate civil action 
by prescription, in cases where during the 
prosecution of the criminal action and prior to its 
extinction, the private-offended party instituted 
together therewith the civil action. In such case, the 
statute of limitations on the civil liability is deemed 
interrupted during the pendency of the criminal case, 
conformably with provisions of Article 1155 21 of 
the Civil Code, that should thereby avoid any 
apprehension on a possible privation of right by 
prescription. 
(People v. Bayotas) 
 
Section 5. Judgment in civil action not a bar. — A final 
judgment rendered in a civil action absolving the 
defendant from civil liability is not a bar to a criminal 
action against the defendant for the same act or 
omission subject of the civil action. (4a) 
 
This applies when the civil action was separately filed 
and decided prior to the institution of the criminal 
action or when the independent civil action that 
proceeded independently with the criminal action was 
decided ahead of the criminal action. 
 
Section 6. Suspension by reason of prejudicial question. — 
A petition for suspension of the criminal action 
based upon the pendency of a prejudicial question in 
a civil action may be filed in the office of the 
prosecutor or the court conducting the preliminary 
investigation. When the criminal action has been 
filed in court for trial, the petition to suspend shall 
be filed in the same criminal action at any time 
before the prosecution rests. (6a) 
 
Section 7. Elements of prejudicial question. — The 
elements of a prejudicial question are: (a) the 
previously instituted civil action involves an issue 
similar or intimately related to the issue raised in the 
subsequent criminal action, and (b) the resolution of 
such issue determines whether or not the criminal 
action may proceed. (5a) 
 
Prejudicial question  
It is a question based on a fact distinct and separate 
from the crime, but so intimately connected with it that 
it determines the guilt or innocence of the accused. It 
is a question which arises in a case, the resolution of 
which is a logical antecedent of the issue involved in 
the said case and the cognizance of which pertains to 
another tribunal 
 
Rationale of prejudicial questions 
The reason behind the principle of a prejudicial 
question is to avoid two conflicting decisions in the 
civil case and in the criminal case. 
 
Applicability 
1) the civil action referred to in issues of 
prejudicial question is not the civil action 
involving the civil liability ex delicto. 
2) it can be law contract or quasi contract, but it 
cannot involve separate civil action under 
Article 32, 33, 34, 2176 or those independent 
civil action because as to those kinds of civil 
action, a prejudicial question cannot arise 
3) based on other sources of obligation such as 
contract, quasi-contract or law 
4) If both are civil cases, then there is no 
prejudicial question. 
5) If both are criminal cases, then again, no 
prejudicial question. 
6) If both are administrative cases or one is 
administrative while the other is criminal, then 
there is no prejudicial question. 
 
Q: Who files the petition for suspension in the criminal 
case when there is prejudicial question? 
A: The rule is actually silent on who should file the 
petition for suspension. It is admitted that the accused 
or even the prosecution can file a petition to suspend 
based on prejudicial question. 
 
Q: Where do you file a petition to suspend a criminal 
action based on prejudicial question? 
A:  
1) When the criminal action is still pending 
preliminary investigation with the office of 
the prosecutor, then you can file for 
suspension in the proper office where the 
officer conducting the preliminary 
investigation is. 
2) If directly filed in court, prejudicial question is 
filed it in the court where the criminal action is 
spending 
 
The previously instituted civil action in this case is a 
declaration of nullity of marriage. Subsequently, a 
criminal action for frustrated parricide was filed. In 
that criminal action, there was a motion to suspend 
criminal proceedings because of alleged prejudicial 
question. The SC said that at the time of the 
commission of the alleged crime, petitioner and 
respondent were married. The subsequent 
dissolution of their marriage in the previously 
instituted civil action will have no effect on the 
alleged crime that was committed at the time of 
the subsistence of their marriage. (Pimentel v. Pimentel) 
 
There are 2 separately instituted civil actions in this 
case. 1) For sum of money; 2) The cancellation of 
mortgage, delivery of title, and damages. The issues 
in these previously instituted civil action is one 
whether a loan was obtained and whether a 

--- PAGE 38 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
38 
mortgage was executed in relation to that loan. The 
subject matter of the subsequently filed criminal 
action of perjury was lying in an affidavit of loss to 
support the request for issuance of a new owner’s 
duplicate copy of the certificate of title. There was 
no prejudicial question (Magestrado v. People) 
 
The previously filed civil action in the case of Yap 
vs. Cabales was a civil action for collection of a sum 
of money. Therefore, the issue in a collection suit for 
sum of money - whether or not the defendant is 
liable to pay the plaintiff a sum of money. It does not 
answer whether or not the accused in a BP 22 case 
issued a bad check. (Yap v. Cabales) 
 
The previously instituted civil action there was 
declaration of nullity of interest of five percent per 
day. The offender issued a check and eventually it 
bounced. Therefore, there is a criminal action for BP 
22. the moment that he signed a check, the check 
issued to the plaintiff and deposited the check to the 
bank and the bank eventually dishonored it, that 
already consummates BP 22. (Jose v. Suarez) 
 
In the previously instituted civil action, there was an 
issue whether or not novation took place in the 
obligation of the parties in the civil case. The 
determination whether there was a novation again 
will not affect the determination of whether or not 
there was an issuance of a bad check – a check issued 
and there after dishonored. Thus, there is no 
prejudicial question in this case. (Landbank v. 
Jacinto) 
 
The previously instituted civil action in this case is 
the declaration of nullity of the appointments of the 
corporate officers then the subsequent criminal 
action that was filed was two counts of Estafa for 
failure to return company cars entrusted to a 
previous officer. The old officers then filed for 
suspension of the criminal action based on 
prejudicial question. They argued that in the 
previously instituted civil action there is an issue of 
whether or not the officers are duly installed or duly 
elected. In that sense, the issue to be determined in 
the previously filed civil action is actually 
determinative of the guilt or innocence of the 
accused in the criminal action. Therefore, there is a 
prejudicial question. (Omictin v. CA) 
 
The previously instituted civil action is also for the 
determination of the validity of the election of the 
new officers and the subsequently filed criminal 
action is again for Estafa and one of the essential 
elements is abuse of confidence. Now, the 
determination whether there was abused of 
confidence in the subsequently file criminal action 
also rests into whether or not an officer was validly 
elected in the corporation. Therefore, the 
determination in the previously instituted civil action 
as to the validity of the election of the new set of 
officers has a bearing or is determinative of whether 
or not the element of Estafa in the subsequently file 
criminal action is present or not. Therefore, there is 
a prejudicial question. (People v. Arambulo) 
 
The previously instituted civil case is an 
administrative case for the specific performance 
before the Housing Land Use Regulatory Board. 
Subsequently, a criminal action for violation of PD 
957 for non-delivery of titles in violation of the 
applicable provisions of PD 957. It is essentially of 
the same issue but the modes of enforcing the 
actions were different. One is in an administrative 
body and the other is a criminal action in court. The 
Supreme Court said that it is a prejudicial question – 
the specific performance case filed in the HULRB 
and therefore the subsequently filed criminal action 
based on the violation of PD 957 should be 
suspended. (San Miguel Properties v. Perez) 
 
 
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION 
 
RULE 112 
Section 1. Preliminary investigation defined; when required. 
— Preliminary investigation is an inquiry or 
proceeding to determine whether there is sufficient 
ground to engender a well-founded belief that a 
crime has been committed and the respondent is 
probably guilty thereof, and should be held for trial. 
 
Except as provided in section 7 of this Rule, a 
preliminary investigation is required to be conducted 
before the filing of a complaint or information for 
an offense where the penalty prescribed by law is at 
least four (4) years, two (2) months and one (1) day 
without regard to the fine. (1a) 
 
DEFINITION OF “PRELIMINARY 
INVESTIGATION”  
The inquiry or proceeding, that is the preliminary 
investigation, is to determine whether there is sufficient 
ground to engender a well-founded belief. This is what 
we call the probable cause in preliminary investigation, 
which we will define later on. And the probable cause, 
is that there is a crime that has been committed and 
that the crime committed is committed by the 
respondent, who is probably guilty thereof and should 
be held for trial in a judicial criminal proceeding.  
 
NATURE 
Executive function 
Function that belongs to the public prosecutor 
Substantive rights 
A personal right and can be waived expressly or 
impliedly 
PURPOSES OF PRELIMINARY 
INVESTIGATION  
A. To inquire concerning the commission of a 
crime and the connection of the accused with 
it, in order that he may be informed of the 
nature and character of the crime charged 
against him, and if there is probable cause, for 
believing him guilty that the state shall take the 
necessary steps to bring him to trial;  

--- PAGE 39 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
39 
B. To preserve the evidence and keep the 
witnesses within the control of the state and to 
determine the amount of bail if the offense is 
bailable 
Probable cause pertains to the facts and 
circumstances sufficient to support a well-founded 
belief that a crime has been committed and the accused 
is probably guilty thereof 
RIGHT OF PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION 
1) Not a constitutional right 
2) Waivable 
PUBLIC PROSECUTOR 
1) The preliminary investigation by a public 
prosecutor is not the stage to decide whether there 
is evidence beyond reasonable doubt of the guilt of 
the person charged. 
2) The main function of the government prosecutor 
during the preliminary investigation is merely to 
determine the existence of probable cause and to 
file the corresponding information if he finds it to 
be so. 
3) if there is no probable cause, not enough evidence 
to support the probability of guilt, then it is the 
duty of an investigating prosecutor to dismiss the 
case to protect an innocent from a hasty, expensive 
and useless criminal trial. 
 
KINDS OF DETERMINATION OF 
PROBABLE CAUSE 
Preliminary 
Investigation 
Preliminary 
Examination/Inquiry 
The determination of 
probable cause by the 
Executive Department 
determination of 
probable cause by the 
judicial department 
The probable cause is for 
the purpose of 
determining whether 
there is a crime 
committed and that the 
respondent is the one 
guilty of that crime. 
the probable cause there 
is for the determination 
of probable cause in 
relation to whether a 
warrant of arrest will be 
issued by the judge. 
Executive function Judicial function 
 
JURISDICTION OF COURTS 
GR: Courts are precluded from reviewing findings of 
the prosecutors – findings of probable cause. The 
rationale behind the rule rests on the principle of 
separation of powers since the determination of 
probable cause, in relation to preliminary investigation 
is an executive function. 
 
XPN: When there is a clear grave abuse of discretion 
amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction. The abuse 
must be shown to be so patent, so gross as to amount 
to an invasion of a positive duty or a virtual refusal to 
perform a duty enjoined by law, or to act at all in 
contemplation of law as where the power is exercised 
in an arbitrary and despotic manner by reason of 
passion or hostility. 
 
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION v. 
CUSTODIAL INVESTIGATIONS 
PRELIMINARY 
INVESTIGATION 
CUSTODIAL 
INVESTIGATION 
an inquiry or proceeding 
to determine whether 
there is sufficient ground 
to engender a well-
founded belief that a 
crime has been 
committed and the 
respondent is probably 
guilty thereof and should 
be held for trial. 
the questioning initiated 
by law enforcement 
officers after a person 
has been taken into 
custody or otherwise 
deprived of his freedom 
of action in any 
significant way. 
happens before an 
investigating prosecutor 
a custodial investigation 
happens before a law 
enforcement officer 
the respondent is made 
to answer the criminal 
charge to defend himself 
against a criminal charge 
that he is probably guilty 
of 
a person invited or who 
is already a suspect in a 
criminal investigation is 
asked as to the 
circumstances of a 
particular impossible 
crime. 
 
What are the offenses requiring preliminary 
investigation?  
Under paragraph 2 of Section 1, except when the 
accused was lawfully arrested without a warrant, a 
preliminary investigation is required to be conducted 
before the filing of the complaint or information for an 
offense when the penalty prescribed by law is at least 4 
years, 2 months and 1 day without regard to fine. 
 
a public prosecutor needs to look at the prescribed 
penalty, which is the penalty indicated by the law for 
the crime and not the imposable penalty which refers 
to that penalty to be imposed on the accused after 
considering the evidence and attendant modifying 
circumstances in the case. 
 
Preliminary investigation not required 
1) When the accused was lawfully arrested without a 
warrant and he does not ask for a preliminary 
investigation, this is called an inquest case.  
2) When the penalty prescribed for the offense charged 
does not exceed 4 years 2 months (and 1 day?), the 
cases falling under this category has been called as 
direct filing cases. 
 
What is the effect of a lack of preliminary 
investigation?  
Consistently, the Supreme Court has held that the 
absence of a preliminary investigation  
1) does not impair the validity of the criminal 
information or render it defective 
2) It does not also affect the jurisdiction of the 
trial court 

--- PAGE 40 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
40 
3) But if there is no preliminary investigation and 
the accused before entering his plea invites the 
attention of the court to its absence (when the 
lack of preliminary investigation is 
appropriately and timely raised by the accused 
meaning), the court, instead of dismissing the 
case, should remand the case to the prosecutor 
so that a preliminary investigation may be 
conducted. 
4) Not a ground to motion to quash 
5) Waivable - if the accused fails to raise the lack 
of preliminary investigation during his or her 
arraignment and he already took his plea 
Instances when probable cause needs to be 
established 
1) Under Sections 1 and 3 of the Rule 112 in 
Preliminary Investigation by the 
investigating officer to determine whether 
there is sufficient ground to engender a well-
founded belief that a crime has been 
committed, and the respondent is probably 
guilty thereof and should be held for trial. A 
preliminary investigation is required before the 
filing of a complaint or information for an 
offense when the penalty prescribed by law is 
at least 4 years, 2 months and 1 day without 
regard to fine. 
2) Under Sections 5 and 8 of Rule 112, by the 
judge to determine whether a warrant of 
arrest or a commitment order, if the accused 
has already been arrested, shall be issued and 
that there is a necessity of placing the 
respondent under the immediate custody in 
order not to frustrate the ends of justice. 
3) Under Section 5 (b) of Rule 113, by a peace 
officer or a private person making a 
warrantless arrest when an offense has just 
been committed and he has probable cause to 
believe, based on personal knowledge of facts 
or circumstances that the person to be arrested 
has committed it. 
4) Under Section 4 of Rule 126, on search and 
seizure by a judge to determine whether a 
search warrant shall be issued and only upon 
probable cause in connection with one specific 
offense to be determined personally by the 
judge after examination under oath or 
affirmation of the complainant and the 
witnesses he may produce and particularly 
describing the place to be searched and the 
things to be seized, which may be anywhere in 
the Philippines. 
Revised Manual for Prosecutors 2017 Edition  
Section 4.1.2. Quantum of Evidence Required is Probable 
Cause. — Probable cause has been defined as a 
reasonable ground of presumption that a matter is or 
may be well-founded; such a state of facts in the mind 
of the prosecutor as would lead a person of ordinary 
caution and prudence to believe, or entertain an honest 
or strong suspicion, that a thing is so.  
The term does not mean “actual and positive cause” 
nor does it import absolute certainty. It is merely based 
on opinion and reasonable belief. Thus, a finding of 
probable cause does not require an inquiry into 
whether there is sufficient evidence to procure a 
conviction. It is enough that it is believed that an act or 
omission complained of constitutes the offense 
charged. Precisely, there is a trial for the reception of 
evidence of the prosecution in support of the charge.  
Probable cause, for purposes of filing a criminal 
information, has been defined as such facts as are 
sufficient to engender a well-founded belief that a 
crime has been committed and that respondent is 
probably guilty thereof, and should be held for trial.  
Probable cause is meant such set of facts and 
circumstances which would lead a reasonably discreet 
and prudent man to believe that the offense charged in 
the Information, or any offense included therein, has 
been committed by the person sought to be arrested.  
In determining probable cause, the average person 
weighs facts and circumstances without resorting to 
the calibrations of the rules of evidence of which 
he/she has no technical knowledge. He/She relies on 
common sense.  
A finding of probable cause needs only to rest on 
evidence showing that, more likely than not, a crime 
has been committed and that it was committed by the 
accused.  
Probable cause demands more than bare suspicion, but 
it requires less than evidence that would justify a 
conviction.  
What is determined during preliminary investigation is 
only probable cause, not proof beyond reasonable 
doubt. As implied by the words themselves, probable 
cause is concerned with probability, not absolute or 
moral certainty.  
A finding of probable cause does not require an inquiry 
into whether there is sufficient evidence to secure a 
conviction. It is enough that the act or omission 
complained of constitutes the offense charged. The 
term does not mean “actual and positive cause” nor 
does it import absolute certainty. It is merely based on 
opinion and reasonable belief. 
Section 4.1.3 
Section 4.1.3. No Fixed Formula for Determining 
Probable Cause. – The determination of probable 
cause does not call for the application of rules and 
standards of proof that a judgment of conviction 
requires after trial on the merits. As implied by the 
words themselves, “probable cause” is concerned with 
probability, not absolute or even moral certainty. The 

--- PAGE 41 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
41 
prosecution need not present at this stage proof 
beyond reasonable doubt. The standards of judgment 
are those of a reasonably prudent man, not the exacting 
calibrations of a judge after a full-blown trial. No law 
or rule states that probable cause requires a specific 
kind of evidence. No formula or fixed rule for its 
determination exists. Probable cause is determined in 
the light of conditions obtaining in a given situation. 
Section 4.1.4. Sound Discretion of the Prosecutor. – 
The institution of a criminal action depends upon the 
sound discretion of the prosecutor. He may or may not 
file the complaint or information, follow or not follow 
that presented by the offended party, according to 
whether the evidence, in his opinion, is sufficient or 
not to establish the guilt of the accused beyond 
reasonable doubt. The reason for placing the criminal 
prosecution under the direction and control of the 
[prosecutor] is to prevent malicious or unfounded 
prosecution by private persons. x x x Prosecuting 
officers under the power vested in them by law, not 
only have the authority but also the duty of prosecuting 
persons who, according to the evidence received from 
the complainant, are shown to be guilty of a crime 
committed within the jurisdiction of their office. They 
have equally the legal duty not to prosecute when after 
an investigation they become convinced that the 
evidence adduced is not sufficient to establish a prima 
facie case. 
Section 4.2. Purposes of a Preliminary Investigation. –  
a. To secure the innocent against hasty, malicious and 
oppressive prosecution and to protect him/her from 
an open and public accusation of a crime and from the 
trouble, expense and anxiety of a public trial; and  
b. To protect the State from having to conduct useless 
and expensive trials.  
The primary objective of a Preliminary Investigation is 
to free the respondent from the inconvenience, 
expense, ignominy and stress of defending 
himself/herself in the course of a formal trial, until the 
reasonable probability of his/her guilt in a more or less 
summary proceeding by a competent office designated 
by law for that purpose has been determined.  
Secondarily, such summary proceeding also protects 
the State from the burden of the unnecessary expense 
and effort in prosecuting alleged offenses, and in 
holding trials arising from false, frivolous or groundless 
charges. 
Section 4.2.1. Double Jeopardy in Preliminary 
Investigation. – The dismissal of a case during 
preliminary investigation does not constitute double 
jeopardy, preliminary investigation not being part of 
the trial. 
 
the requisites for double jeopardy to attach is that 
there is:  
1. A first jeopardy must have attached prior to the 
second one;  
2. The first jeopardy must have been validly 
terminated;  
3. The second jeopardy must be for the same offense 
as the first jeopardy 
Legal jeopardy attaches only upon:  
1. Valid indictment;  
2. Before a competent court;  
3. After arraignment;  
4. A valid plea having been entered; and  
5. The case was dismissed or otherwise terminated 
without the express consent of the accused. 
Section 4.3. Nature of a Preliminary Investigation. – 
4.3.1. It is an Executive Function. – A preliminary 
investigation is not a quasi-judicial proceeding. [The 
investigating prosecutor] does not exercise 
adjudication nor rule–making functions. It is a function 
of the Office of the National Prosecution Service 
which is under the control and supervision of the 
Department of Justice within the executive branch of 
the government. 
4.3.2. It is Preliminary in Nature. – The investigation is 
advisedly called preliminary, as it is yet to be followed 
by the trial proper. The investigating officer acts upon 
probable cause and reasonable belief, not proof 
beyond reasonable doubt 
4.3.3. It is a Summary and Inquisitorial Proceeding. – 
While it is a summary proceeding, it is done in a 
scrupulous manner to prevent material damage to 
a potential accused’s constitutional right to liberty 
and the guarantees of freedom and fair play. Merely 
inquisitorial; not trial on the merits; It must be stressed 
that the right of an accused to a preliminary 
investigation is a personal right and can be waived 
expressly or by implication; if failed to invoke 
before entering a plea; it is not part of the due 
process guaranteed by the Constitution; and does 
not place the respondent in jeopardy 
 
4.3.4. It is not a Judicial Inquiry or Proceeding. – 
Preliminary investigation is merely inquisitorial, and 
is often the only means of discovering the persons who 
may be reasonably charged with a crime and to enable 
the fiscal to prepare his/ her complaint or information. 
It is not a trial of the case on the merits and has no 
purpose except that of determining whether a crime 
has been committed and whether there is probable 
cause to believe that the accused is guilty thereof. While 

--- PAGE 42 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
42 
the fiscal makes that determination, he/she cannot be 
said to be acting as a quasi- court, for it is the courts, 
ultimately, that pass judgment on the accused, not the 
fiscal. 
Section 4.4. Right to Preliminary Investigation. – 4.4.1. 
It is not a Constitutional Right. – The right to a 
preliminary investigation is not a constitutional right, 
meaning, it is not expressly provided for in the 
Constitution. It is not therefore guaranteed by the 
Constitution unlike for instance, the right to counsel or 
to remain silent which is expressly embodied under 
Section 12 of Article III of the Constitution. 
4.4.2. It is Merely a Statutory Grant. – The right to a 
preliminary investigation is statutory, not 
constitutional.” In short, the rights of a respondent in 
a preliminary investigation are merely statutory rights, 
not constitutional due process rights. 
4.4.3. It is a Personal Right. – The right to a 
preliminary investigation is also a personal right, 
which can be waived expressly or impliedly. 
Preliminary investigation is not part of the due process 
guaranteed by the Constitution. It is an inquiry to 
determine whether there is sufficient ground to 
engender a well-founded belief that a crime has been 
committed and the respondent is probably guilty 
thereof. Instead, the right to a preliminary investigation 
is personal. It is afforded to the accused by statute, and 
can be waived, either expressly or by implication. The 
waiver extends to any irregularity in the preliminary 
investigation, where one was conducted.  
In inquest cases, the accused impliedly waives his/her 
right to a preliminary investigation, if he/she fails to 
invoke the same within five (5) days from the time 
he/she learns of the filing of the Information. This 
five-day period for the filing of a motion for 
preliminary investigation after an Information has been 
filed in court against an accused who was arrested 
without a warrant, has been characterized as 
mandatory. 
4.4.4. It is a Substantive Right. – The right to 
preliminary investigation is substantive, not merely 
formal or technical. To deny it to petitioner would 
deprive him/her of the full measure of his/her right to 
due process. 
 
Section 2. Officers authorized to conduct preliminary 
investigations. — 
 
The following may conduct preliminary 
investigations: 
 
(a) Provincial or City Prosecutors and their 
assistants; 
(b) Judges of the Municipal Trial Courts and 
Municipal Circuit Trial Courts; 
(c) National and Regional State Prosecutors; and 
(d) Other officers as may be authorized by law. 
 
Their authority to conduct preliminary 
investigations shall include all crimes cognizable by 
the proper court in their respective territorial 
jurisdictions. (2a) 
 
The Supreme Court has withdrawn the authority of 
judges of the municipal trial court or the first level 
courts to conduct preliminary investigation 
 
Prosecutors Courts 
probable cause in 
conducting preliminary 
investigations 
probable cause to the 
issuance of a warrant of 
arrest, search and seizure 
 
Other officers authorized by law 
1) COMELEC 
SEC. 43. Section 265 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 881 is 
hereby amended to read as follow: 
 
"SEC. 265. Prosecution. - The Commission shall, 
through its duly authorized legal officers, have the 
power, concurrent with the other prosecuting arms 
of the government, to conduct preliminary 
investigation of all election offenses punishable 
under this Code, and prosecute the same" 
 
2) Office of Ombudsman 
The Office of the Ombudsman has authority to 
investigate and prosecute on its own or on complaint 
by any person any act or omission of any public officer 
or employee, office or agency, when such act or 
omission appears to be illegal, unjust, improper or 
inefficient. It has primary jurisdiction over cases 
cognizable by the Sandiganbayan, and in the exercise 
of this primary jurisdiction, it may take over at any 
stage from any investigatory agency of the government 
the investigation of such cases. 
 
The investigators of the Office of the Ombudsman 
have concurrent jurisdiction with public prosecutors 
to conduct a preliminary investigation in all cases 
involving public officers, whether falling under the 
jurisdiction of the Sandiganbayan or the regular court. 
Prosecutors under the DOJ or the prosecutors under 
the Office of the Ombudsman can take cognizance of 
cases involving public officers. But in cases where the 
exclusive jurisdiction is with the Sandiganbayan, the 
Ombudsman may assert its primary jurisdiction at 
any stage of the investigation 
 
3) Presidential Commission on Good 
Governance 
The Presidential Commission on Good Governance 
with the assistance of the Office of the Solicitor 
General and other government agencies, empowered 
to investigate, file, and prosecute cases investigated by 
it are also authorized to conduct preliminary 
investigation. 
 
4) Special counsels designated by the Secretary of 
Justice or the Department of Justice 

--- PAGE 43 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
43 
Special counsels designated by the Secretary of Justice 
or the Department of Justice may create a panel of 
investigating prosecutors for special kinds of cases. 
 
Section 3. Procedure. — The preliminary 
investigation shall be conducted in the following 
manner: 
 
(a) The complaint shall state the address of the 
respondent and shall be accompanied by the 
affidavits of the complainant and his witnesses, as 
well as other supporting documents to establish 
probable cause. They shall be in such number of 
copies as there are respondents, plus two (2) copies 
for the official file. The affidavits shall be subscribed 
and sworn to before any prosecutor or government 
official authorized to administer oath, or, in their 
absence or unavailability, before a notary public, 
each of who must certify that he personally 
examined the affiants and that he is satisfied that 
they voluntarily executed and understood their 
affidavits. 
 
(b) Within ten (10) days after the filing of the 
complaint, the investigating officer shall either 
dismiss it if he finds no ground to continue with the 
investigation, or issue a subpoena to the respondent 
attaching to it a copy of the complaint and its 
supporting affidavits and documents. 
 
The respondent shall have the right to examine the 
evidence submitted by the complainant which he 
may not have been furnished and to copy them at 
his expense. If the evidence is voluminous, the 
complainant may be required to specify those which 
he intends to present against the respondent, and 
these shall be made available for examination or 
copying by the respondent at his expense. 
 
Objects as evidence need not be furnished a party 
but shall be made available for examination, copying, 
or photographing at the expense of the requesting 
party. 
 
(c) Within ten (10) days from receipt of the 
subpoena with the complaint and supporting 
affidavits and documents, the respondent shall 
submit his counter-affidavit and that of his witnesses 
and other supporting documents relied upon for his 
defense. The counter-affidavits shall be subscribed 
and sworn to and certified as provided in paragraph 
(a) of this section, with copies thereof furnished by 
him to the complainant. The respondent shall not be 
allowed to file a motion to dismiss in lieu of a 
counter-affidavit. 
 
(d) If the respondent cannot be subpoenaed, or if 
subpoenaed, does not submit counter-affidavits 
within the ten (10) day period, the investigating 
officer shall resolve the complaint based on the 
evidence presented by the complainant. 
 
(e) The investigating officer may set a hearing if there 
are facts and issues to be clarified from a party or a 
witness. The parties can be present at the hearing but 
without the right to examine or cross-examine. They 
may, however, submit to the investigating officer 
questions which may be asked to the party or witness 
concerned. 
 
The hearing shall be held within ten (10) days from 
submission of the counter-affidavits and other 
documents or from the expiration of the period for 
their submission. It shall be terminated within five 
(5) days. 
 
(f) Within ten (10) days after the investigation, the 
investigating officer shall determine whether or not 
there is sufficient ground to hold the respondent for 
trial. (3a) 
 
1) submission of the complaint with affidavits 
and supporting documents, and then  
2) the submission of counter-affidavits with 
supporting affidavits and documents 
3) If it is necessary, the investigating officer may 
set a hearing to conduct clarificatory 
questioning from both parties. But during this 
clarificatory hearing, there is no right to 
examine or cross-examine. The only right given 
here is to submit to the investigating officers 
questions which either party would like to ask 
to the witnesses or to the opposing party. 
4) After the clarificatory questioning (which 
under the rules should be terminated within 
five days), then the end of the preliminary 
investigation will be the last day of the 
clarificatory hearing. And the investigating 
prosecutor is given ten (10) days to decide 
whether there is probable cause or none. 
However, if there is no clarificatory hearing, 
the investigation will end at the submission of 
the counter-affidavit. 
5) reply to the Counter-Affidavit. If the other 
party wants to reply to the Reply-Affidavit, 
they can file a Rejoinder Affidavit. 
 
Affidavits, counter-affidavits and supporting 
documents 
1) should be made on personal knowledge 
2) should show affirmatively that the affiants are 
competent to testify on the matters stated 
therein. 
3) sworn to before any prosecutor or government 
official authorized to administer oath, or only 
in their absence and unavailability, a notary 
public who must certify that he personally 
examined the affiants and that he is satisfied 
that they voluntarily executed and understood 
their affidavits. 
 Affidavits, notarized by a notary public 
without any showing that a prosecutor 
or qualified government official was 
unavailable, are not in accord with the 
rules. Thus, it may not be considered or 
accepted by the investigating 
prosecutor. 

--- PAGE 44 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
44 
 
Upon filing of the complaint 
1. Dismiss the complaint — The investigating 
prosecutor is empowered or authorized to actually 
dismiss the complaint within ten (10) days after its 
filing if he finds no ground to continue with the 
investigation; or  
2. Issue a subpoena — He or she may issue a subpoena 
to a respondent attaching to it the copy of the 
complaint and its supporting affidavits and documents 
and directing the respondent to file a counter-affidavit 
 
Sec 3c 
A verified motion to dismiss may be filed on the 
following grounds: 
1) The absence of probable cause;  
2) The fact that the complaint or one similar 
thereto or identical therewith has previously 
been filed with the office and has been fully 
adjudicated upon the merits after due 
preliminary investigation proceeding; and  
3) The extinction of the respondent's criminal 
liability by reason of death, pardon, amnesty, 
repeal of the law under which the prosecution 
is sought, or any other legal causes such as for 
example the lack of jurisdiction of the 
investigating prosecutor. 
 
Rights of the complainants and respondents under Sec. 
3, Rule 112  
1. Respondents — has the right to receive a copy 
of the complaint and its supporting affidavits 
and documents.  
 Respondents and co-respondents have 
no right to demand that they be 
furnished with copies of the counter-
affidavits of their co-respondents. 
 
what the respondents right to examine refers only to 
the evidence submitted by the complainant and not 
to the counter-affidavits of his co-respondents 
(Jinggoy Estrada vs. OMB) 
 
2. 2. Complainant — has the right to receive a 
copy of the counter-affidavits and the 
affidavits and supporting documents from the 
respondent. 
 
Sec 3d 
Remember, preliminary investigation can actually 
proceed ex-parte or without the participation of the 
respondents. It is under Section 3(d), Rule 112. The 
rule allows the investigating prosecutor to resolve the 
complaint based on the evidence before him if the 
respondent could not be made to participate in the 
preliminary investigation despite the efforts to reach 
him. However, it must be shown that the investigating 
prosecutor, at the very least, had the genuine effort to 
reach the respondent or to furnish him with the 
complaint and the affidavits and the documents 
supporting such complaint 
 
during the preliminary investigation, all the other 
respondents were given a subpoena and a copy of 
the complaint and the supporting documents. 
However, Mr. Labay was not furnished the 
subpoena, the complaint, the affidavits, and the 
supporting documents because two of the addresses 
to which the subpoena, etc. were sent to were his 
previous office address and his previous residence. 
Therefore, despite several attempts, the subpoena 
could really not served upon Mr. Labay. Because of 
this failure of service, Mr. Labay became unaware 
that there was already a preliminary investigation 
against him. His daughter, Atty. Labay, only found 
out that there was an investigation and that there was 
already a resolution because Atty. Labay saw it on 
TV. she requested for copies of the complaint and 
the supporting documents. However, the request 
was denied. Instead she was given a copy of the 
resolution approving the filing of the information 
against, among others, respondent Labay for 
violation of Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act 
before the Sandiganbayan. A first Omnibus motion 
for re-investigation was then filed and a copy of the 
complaint and the supporting documents were 
requested. This was denied by the Ombudsman, 
thus, a motion for reconsideration was filed which 
was denied again. 
 
Subsequently, the information was filed before the 
Sandiganbayan and it was only days after the filing 
of the information that Mr. Labay was given a copy 
of the complaint along with the copy of the affidavits 
and documents, but that happened only after the 
information was filed before the Sandiganbayan.  
 
However, the peculiar circumstance here is Mr. 
Labay did not want to evade the service of the 
subpoena. He didn’t know but upon knowing or 
gaining knowledge, he was the one who volunteered 
to have a copy of the complaint and the supporting 
documents in order for him to properly answer. Mr. 
Labay really didn’t have any attempt to delay the 
prosecution of this offense he had genuinely wanted 
to participate, but that the Ombudsman did not give 
him that opportunity by not giving him timely the 
copy of the complaint and the supporting 
documents.  
 
Actually, the Ombudsman could have properly 
resolve the preliminary investigation even without 
the participation of Mr. Labay because that is under 
the rules. However, because it was Mr. Labay 
himself who volunteered, who approached the 
Ombudsman to participate to have a copy of the 
complaint and supporting documents in order for 
him to properly answer, properly present his 
defense, but despite that effort the Ombudsman still 
denied Mr. Labay’s request to be furnished timely a 
copy of the complaint and the supporting 
documents. 
 
The Supreme Court said that while the Ombudsman 
was correct in resolving the complaint based on the 
evidence presented in accordance with the rules even 
if no counter-affidavit was filed by Mr. Labay, there’s 

--- PAGE 45 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
45 
no dispute that the Ombudsman was unable to serve 
copies of the complaint or the supporting 
documents prior to or even during the preliminary 
investigation of the case meaning.  
 
The Supreme Court noted however, that the 
situation effectively changed when petitioner made 
himself available to the Ombudsman when he 
requested access to the case records. The 
Ombudsman had a clear opportunity to furnish 
petitioner with copies of the complaint affidavit and 
its supporting documents. Instead, it merely decided 
to furnish petitioner with a copy of its resolution.  
 
The Supreme Court added that even assuming that 
the Ombudsman was merely complying with Atty. 
Labay's requests for information when it responded 
with case titles and docket numbers of the cases 
pending against petitioner Labay, it should have 
exercised its duty to inform the petitioner of the 
charges filed against him by furnishing him copies of 
the complaint affidavit and its supporting 
documents, or at least, it should have directed and 
allowed petitioner to access the records, at its office 
pursuant to the right of the respondent to examine 
the evidence submitted by the complainant. But this 
was not done by the Ombudsman.  
 
by the mere fact that the petitioner, Atty. Labay was 
not yet furnished a copy of the complaint affidavit 
and the supporting documents at the time that the 
Ombudsman furnished him a copy of the resolution 
finding probable cause against him, it is clear that he 
could not effectively and sufficiently address the 
allegation against him. Atty. Labay should not be 
blamed for being unable to raise any substantive 
defense in either the omnibus motions he filed with 
the Ombudsman, since he had not even seen any of 
the allegations filed against him by the Ombudsman. 
More importantly, he could not have been expected 
to seek appropriate evidence to support his defense 
when he wasn't even given any access to the 
documents submitted by the Sandiganbayan in 
support of its complaint.  
 
The Supreme Court further added that in fact, the 
violation of petitioner Labay's constitutional right to 
due process is made even more evident when the 
Ombudsman unceremoniously denied his request to 
be furnished copies of the complaint affidavit and its 
supporting documents in the first Omnibus motion 
and reiterated in his second Omnibus motion in 
both orders denying the two Omnibus motions. The 
Ombudsman seemingly ignored petitioners request 
and effectively denied petitioner of his right to 
secure copies of the complaint affidavit. 
 
Unfortunately, the Sandiganbayan committed grave 
abuse of discretion when it failed to grant petition 
Labay's extremely urgent Omnibus motion, despite 
the glaring violation committed by the Ombudsman. 
The Sandiganbayan should have recognized these 
patent violations and ordered the remand of the case 
to the Ombudsman for the conduct of a proper 
preliminary investigation with respect to petitioner 
Labay's participation in the crimes charged.  
 
There is also no merit in the Ombudsman’s position, 
that it was incumbent on petitioner Labay to justify 
his whereabouts during the time that the 
Ombudsman was attempting service of the 
subpoena on him, since no law or regulation requires 
an accused in a preliminary investigation to submit 
himself to the Ombudsman, or at the very least, to 
update the latter of his latest address (Labay v. Sandiganbayan) 
 
GR: the preliminary investigation can go on ex parte 
without the participation of the respondent if he was 
already served a subpoena and he fails or refuses to 
submit counter affidavit within the 10 days provided 
for under the rules, that will not constrain the 
investigating prosecutor to proceed with the 
preliminary investigation in finding whether or not 
there is probably a cause. Even just based on the 
complaint, and the supporting affidavits and 
documents provided for by the complainant 
 
XPN: when circumstances like in the case of Labay v. 
Sandiganbayan happens, where it is actually the 
respondent who is willing and volunteering to 
participate in the preliminary investigation, but still, the 
investigating prosecutor denies the rights of the 
responded under the rules, then it would be considered 
as grave abuse of discretion. 
 
Sec 3e – CLARIFICATORY HEARING 
the investigating officer has the right to set a hearing 
for a clarificatory question. This is discretionary for the 
investigating officer and not mandatory at all. 
Therefore, since it is discretionary, the absence of a 
clarificatory hearing is not a denial of due process. 
 
Under DOJ Circular No. 01-2000, all cases of 
preliminary investigation being conducted by 
investigating prosecutors shall be completely 
disposed of within a period of 60 days from the 
date of assignment. This period shall include hearings 
conducted in preparation and issuance of resolutions 
and corresponding information if any. 
 
However, the noncompliance with the period does not 
affect the validity of the resolution or the information. 
It will be the investigating prosecutor who will just be 
subject to disciplinary action if there is no justifiable 
explanation of why there is a delay in the resolution of 
the preliminary investigation. 
 
Sec 3f 
Officially the termination of the preliminary 
investigation is upon the filing of the information in 
the proper court or when there is a dismissal of the 
complaint, the approval of the proper approving 
authority. So for preliminary investigation conducted 
by the:  
 Provincial Prosecutor's Office, it will 
be the provincial prosecutor who will 
approve.  

--- PAGE 46 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
46 
 City Prosecutor's Office, it will be the 
City Prosecutor who will approve.  
 Regional State Prosecutor's office, it 
will be the Chief State Prosecutor or 
the Prosecutor General 
 In cases of offenses cognizable by the 
Sandiganbayan in the exercise of its 
original jurisdiction, it will be the 
Ombudsman or his Deputy. So, 
deputies will be from Luzon, Visayas, 
Mindanao, and from the military 
 
Certification of preliminary investigation 
If he finds in the resolution that there is probable 
cause, the information shall contain a certification by 
the investigating officer under oath in which he shall 
certify to the following:  
a) that he or as shown by the record, an 
authorized officer, has personally examined the 
complainant and his witnesses;  
b) that there is reasonable ground to believe that 
a crime has been committed;  
c) that the accused is probably guilty thereof;  
d) that the accused was informed of the complaint 
and of the evidence submitted against him; and 
e) that he was given an opportunity to submit 
controverting evidence 
 
Effect of absence 
Notwithstanding the absence in the information of a 
certification as to the holding of a preliminary 
investigation, the information is nonetheless 
considered valid for the reason that such certification 
is not an essential part of the information itself, and its 
absence cannot vitiate the information. 
 
What is not allowed is the filing of the information 
without a preliminary investigation, having been 
previously conducted in those instances where 
preliminary investigation is necessary. 
 
within five days from the resolution, the investigating 
prosecutor shall forward the record of the case to the 
proper approving authority. The approving authority 
shall act on the resolution within 10 days from the 
receipt thereof and shall immediately inform the parties 
of such action. 
 
Forwarding of the records for action 
no complaint or information may be filed or dismissed 
by the investigating prosecutor without the prior 
written authority or approval of the corresponding 
approving authority. Thus, the resolution of the 
investigating prosecutor may be reversed or affirmed 
by the Provincial or City Prosecutor or the Prosecutor 
General or the Ombudsman as the case may be. 
 
Rule when recommendation for dismissal is 
disapproved 
Where the investigating prosecutor recommends the 
dismissal of the complaint, but his recommendation is 
disapproved by the Provincial or City Prosecutor or the 
Chief Prosecutor or the Ombudsman or his deputy on 
the ground that probable cause exists, the latter may  
1) by himself file the information against the 
respondent or  
2) direct another assistant prosecutor or state 
prosecutor to do so without conducting 
another preliminary investigation. (it will no 
longer be the investigating prosecutor who will 
handle the case and file the information in 
court. It will be a totally different prosecutor.) 
 
Motion for reconsideration 
Under the rules of the Department of Justice, the  
 
1) aggrieved party under the preliminary 
investigation may actually file a motion for 
reconsideration within 15 days from the receipt 
of the assailed resolution. 
2) If the motion is denied, the aggrieved party 
may appeal within 15 days from the denial of 
the motion for reconsideration and the appeal 
is taken to the Office of the Secretary of 
Justice. 
 
It will be termed a petition for review before the 
Secretary of Justice who has the power to reverse, 
modify or affirm the prosecutor’s determination in 
preliminary investigation. 
 
Appeals 
Secretary of Justice 
The appeal to the Secretary of justice, however, does 
not hold or prevent the filing of a corresponding 
information in court based on the finding of probable 
cause in the appealed resolution unless the secretary of 
justice directs otherwise, but the one appealing and the 
prosecutor shall see to it that pending resolution of the 
appeal, the proceedings in court are held in abeyance. 
 
The party filing a petition for review is allowed to file 
a motion for the suspension of the arraignment and 
upon motion by the proper party the arraignment shall 
be suspended, among others, if a petitioned for review 
of the resolution of the prosecutor is pending. 
 
The authority of the investigating prosecutor and even 
the Secretary of the Department of Justice as 
previously discussed, is a discretion that is executive in 
nature but if there is grave abuse of discretion, then the 
court can step in and nullify or reverse the act which 
was done in grave abuse of discretion. 
 
Office of the President 
The resolution of the Secretary of Justice in appealed 
cases, may either be 
1)  brought to the Court of Appeals via petition 
for certiorari under Rule 65 of the Rules of 
Court based on grave abuse of discretion or  
2) it may be brought on appeal to the Office of 
the President ONLY in the following cases 

--- PAGE 47 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
47 
a) the offense involved is punishable by 
reclusion perpetua to death;  
 For offenses which involve 
imprisonment, which is lower than 
reclusion perpetua to death, the only 
mode of raising it up would be 
judicial, going to the court of appeals 
via rule 65 of the rules of court, petition 
for certiorari, and based on grave abuse 
of discretion. 
b) new and material issues are raised which 
were not previously presented before the 
Department of Justice and were not hence 
ruled upon;  
c) the prescription of the offense is not due to 
lapse within six months from notice of the 
questioned resolution; and  
d) The appeal or petition for review is filed 
within 30 days from notice 
 
If there is already a resolution of the Office of the 
President, then it can be raised to the Supreme Court 
within 15 days from notice of the final order of the 
Office of the President, and the procedure that you will 
take will be under Rule 43 of the Rules of Court. The 
resolution in the Court of Appeals, can be raised to the 
Supreme Court via rule 45 to the Supreme Court. 
 
From the Office of the President (can be raised by) 
Rule 43 because the Office of the President is 
considered quasi-judicial body when it resolves appeal 
similar to this. From the Court of Appeals, under Rule 
43 whatever decision judgment resolution order there 
that is final can be raised by Rule 45 (Petition for 
Review on Certiorari) which should be based on pure 
questions of law to the Supreme Court. 
 
Review of the ruling of the ombudsman in 
criminal cases 
In criminal cases, the ruling of the Ombudsman shall 
be elevated to the Supreme Court by way of Rule 65 
(Petition for Certiorari). The Supreme Court's power 
of a review over resolutions and orders of the Office 
of the Ombudsman is restricted only to determining 
whether there is a grave abuse of discretion committed 
by the Ombudsman in the resolution of criminal cases. 
The court is not authorized to correct every error or 
mistake of the Office of the Ombudsman other than 
grave abuse of discretion. The remedy therefore is not 
a petition under Rule 45 but a Petition for Certiorari 
under Rule 65. 
 
Appeal from the Resolution of the Prosecutor in 
Election Offense 
In cases where the prosecutor or city fiscal exercises 
the delegated power to conduct a preliminary 
investigation of election offenses, the issue of probable 
cause is resolved by the investigating officer after 
submitting their recommendation. From such 
resolution, appeal to the COMELEC lies. Such second 
look at the probable cause is an exercise of the 
COMELEC’s review powers. The COMELEC’S 
ruling then would be considered immediately final and 
executory. As the COMELEC is acting as a quasi-
judicial body, any appeals to such ruling is raised to the 
Court of Appeals via Rule 43. 
 
There is a concept of the court’s retention of 
jurisdiction upon the filing of the information. 
Whatever the remedy is after the determination of 
probable cause or the lack thereof, if it is the 
determination of probable cause, there is no stopping 
the public prosecutor from filing the information even 
if the aggrieved party raises it to the Secretary of Justice 
(SOJ). 
 
The determination of the presence or absence of 
probable cause for the issuance of warrants of arrest 
against the accused or for the withdrawal of the 
information or for the dismissal of the case are also 
under the court’s discretion. 
 
Where it has already been filed with the court and there 
has been a review in the SOJ, before there is a 
resolution by the SOJ, a motion for suspension must 
be filed in the trial court. This is done to avoid 
simultaneous proceedings because resolutions of the 
trial court are as valid as that of the SOJ. Thus, being 
separate entities, simultaneous proceedings might lead 
to conflicting resolutions. When the information is 
filed with the trial court, it shall be its duty and 
discretion that will prevail. 
 
Section 4. Resolution of investigating prosecutor 
and its review. — If the investigating prosecutor 
finds cause to hold the respondent for trial, he shall 
prepare the resolution and information. He shall 
certify under oath in the information that he, or as 
shown by the record, an authorized officer, has 
personally examined the complainant and his 
witnesses; that there is reasonable ground to believe 
that a crime has been committed and that the 
accused is probably guilty thereof; that the accused 
was informed of the complaint and of the evidence 
submitted against him; and that he was given an 
opportunity to submit controverting evidence. 
Otherwise, he shall recommend the dismissal of the 
complaint. 
 
Within five (5) days from his resolution, he shall 
forward the record of the case to the provincial or 
city prosecutor or chief state prosecutor, or to the 
Ombudsman or his deputy in cases of offenses 
cognizable by the Sandiganbayan in the exercise of 
its original jurisdiction. They shall act on the 
resolution within ten (10) days from their receipt 
thereof and shall immediately inform the parties of 
such action. 
 
No complaint or information may be filed or 
dismissed by an investigating prosecutor without the 
prior written authority or approval of the provincial 
or city prosecutor or chief state prosecutor or the 
Ombudsman or his deputy. 

--- PAGE 48 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
48 
 
Where the investigating prosecutor recommends the 
dismissal of the complaint but his recommendation 
is disapproved by the provincial or city prosecutor 
or chief state prosecutor or the Ombudsman or his 
deputy on the ground that a probable cause exists, 
the latter may, by himself, file the information 
against the respondent, or direct any other assistant 
prosecutor or state prosecutor to do so without 
conducting another preliminary investigation. 
 
If upon petition by a proper party under such rules 
as the Department of Justice may prescribe or motu 
proprio, the Secretary of Justice reverses or modifies 
the resolution of the provincial or city prosecutor or 
chief state prosecutor, he shall direct the prosecutor 
concerned either to file the corresponding 
information without conducting another preliminary 
investigation, or to dismiss or move for dismissal of 
the complaint or information with notice to the 
parties. The same rule shall apply in preliminary 
investigations conducted by the officers of the 
Office of the Ombudsman. (4a) 
 
Section 5. When warrant of arrest may issue.* —  
(a) By the Regional Trial Court. — Within ten (10) 
days from the filing of the complaint or information, 
the judge shall personally evaluate the resolution of 
the prosecutor and its supporting evidence. He may 
immediately dismiss the case if the evidence on 
record clearly fails to establish probable cause. If he 
finds probable cause, he shall issue a warrant of 
arrest, or a commitment order when the complaint 
or information was filed pursuant to section 6 of this 
Rule. In case of doubt on the existence of probable 
cause, the judge may order the prosecutor to present 
additional evidence within five (5) days from notice 
and the issue must be resolved by the court within 
thirty (30) days from the filing of the complaint or 
information.  
(b) By the Municipal Trial Court. — When required 
pursuant to the second paragraph of section 1 of this 
Rule, the preliminary investigation of cases falling 
under the original jurisdiction of the Metropolitan 
Trial Court, Municipal Trial Court in Cities, 
Municipal Trial Court or Municipal Circuit Trial 
Court SHALL be conducted by the prosecutor. The 
procedure for the issuance of a warrant of arrest by 
the judge shall be governed by paragraph (a) of this 
section.  
(c) When warrant of arrest not necessary. — A 
warrant of arrest shall not issue if the accused is 
already under detention pursuant to a warrant issued 
by the municipal trial court in accordance with 
paragraph (b) of this section, or if the complaint or 
information was filed pursuant to section 6 of this 
Rule or is for an offense penalized by fine only. The 
court shall then proceed in the exercise of its original 
jurisdiction. (As amended by A.M. No. 05-8-26- SC.) 
 
Warrant of arrest 
Is a written order of the court, which is made on behalf 
of the State and is based upon a complaint issued 
pursuant to statute and/or court rule; and which 
commands law enforcement officers to arrest a person 
and bring him before a magistrate. 
 
Action of the judge upon filing of the complaint or 
information 
In the procedure for the issuance of a warrant, the 
judge of the RTC shall within 10 days from the filing 
of the complaint or information do either of the 
following:  
1) The judge of the RTC shall personally evaluate 
the resolution of the prosecutor and the 
supporting evidence regarding the existence of 
probable cause, and on the basis thereof, issue 
a warrant of arrest. 
 
Warrant of arrest Search warrant 
the judge will personally 
look at the documents, 
information, and 
supporting evidence, etc. 
the judge will require a 
personal examination of 
the complainant or the 
one that applied for a 
search warrant, and the 
witnesses which he may 
provide. 
 
2) The trial court judge of the RTC, if he has 
doubts as to the existence of probable cause, 
shall have the power to order the prosecutor to 
present additional evidence. 
 
 Additional evidence - The judge must 
satisfy himself that based on the 
evidence submitted there is sufficient 
proof that a crime has been committed 
and that the person to be arrested is 
probably guilty thereof. At this stage of 
the criminal proceeding, the judge is 
not yet tasked to review in detail the 
evidence submitted during the 
preliminary investigation. It is 
sufficient that he personally evaluates 
such evidence in determining probable 
cause. 
 Dismiss - The judge is also empowered 
to immediately dismiss the case if the 
evidence on record clearly fails to 
establish probable cause. But it is only 
when the judge finds that the evidence 
on hand is absolutely failing to support 
a finding of probable cause, that he can 
dismiss the case. 
 Warrant of arrest with 
recommendation for bail - When there 
is a determination by the judge that 
there is probable cause, a judge should 
issue a warrant of arrest with a 
recommendation for bail — in those 
cases of course that bail is a matter of 
right. 
 
Rule 114, Section 17. Bail, where filed. (c) Any 
person in custody who is not yet charged in court 

--- PAGE 49 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
49 
may apply for bail with any court in the province, 
city, or municipality where he is held 
 
SUMMARY 
(1) He may immediately dismiss the case, if the 
evidence on the record clearly fails to 
establish probable cause; or  
(2) If he finds probable cause, he shall issue a 
warrant of arrest or a commitment order if 
the complaint or information was filed 
pursuant to Section 6 of Rule 112 (valid 
warrantless arrest); or  
(3) If he doubts the existence of probable cause, 
he may order the prosecutor to present 
additional evidence within five days from 
notice 
 
In relation to the discussion that it is the duty of the 
judge of the court to personally evaluate the records of 
the case, the judge should not rely solely on the 
certification of the fiscal. 
 
When is Warrant of Arrest unnecessary? 
1) If the complaint is filed pursuant to the 
provision of section 6 rule 112 due to the 
absence or unavailability of an inquest 
prosecutor. the issuance of a warrant is 
unnecessary because the accused is already in 
detention. What the court will issue is a 
commitment order. 
2) If the complaint or information was filed after 
inquest proceeding conducted by the inquest 
prosecutor. Same as #1, here there is already 
detention of the accused, and therefore the 
court will just issue a commitment order 
instead of a warrant of arrest 
3) In criminal cases falling under the Revised 
Rules on Summary Procedure except when the 
accused failed to appear whenever required. 
This is because for cases falling under the 
Revised Rules on Summary Procedure, there is 
usually no imprisonment. The penalty is mostly 
fine. 
XPN: However, if the person accused of a 
crime failed to appear whenever required by 
the court, then the court may issue a warrant of 
arrest to compel him to come to court 
4) In cases not requiring preliminary investigation 
nor falling under the Revised Rule on Summary 
Procedure and the judge is satisfied that there 
is no necessity for placing the accused under 
custody 
5) When the evidence on record fails clearly to 
establish probable cause; and 
6) When the offense is penalized by fine only 
 
Section 6, Rule 112. When accused lawfully arrested 
without warrant. — When a person is lawfully 
arrested without a warrant involving an offense 
which requires a preliminary investigation, the 
complaint or information may be filed by a 
prosecutor without need of such investigation 
provided an inquest has been conducted in 
accordance with existing rules. 
 
In the absence or unavailability of an inquest 
prosecutor, the complaint may be filed by the 
offended party or a peace office directly with the 
proper court on the basis of the affidavit of the 
offended party or arresting officer or person.  
 
Before the complaint or information is filed, the 
person arrested may ask for a preliminary 
investigation in accordance with this Rule, but he 
must sign a waiver of the provisions of Article 125 
of the Revised Penal Code, as amended, in the 
presence of his counsel. Notwithstanding the 
waiver, he may apply for bail and the investigation 
must be terminated within fifteen (15) days from its 
inception.  
 
After the filing of the complaint or information in 
court without a preliminary investigation, the 
accused may, within five (5) days from the time he 
learns of its filing, ask for a preliminary investigation 
with the same right to adduce evidence in his defense 
as provided in this Rule. 
 
INQUEST PROCEEDINGS 
Application 
Applies only in cases where the accused was lawfully 
arrested without warrant of arrest under Section 5 Rule 
113 of the Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure. 
Where the records do not show that the accused was 
lawfully arrested, this rule does not apply. 
 
Under DOJ Circular No. 61, dated September 21 1993, 
the initial duty of the inquest officer is to determine if 
the arrest of the detained person was made in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraphs A and B 
of Section 5 of rule 113. 
 
DOJ Circular No. 61, Section 9. Where arrest not 
properly effected. — Should the Inquest Officer find 
that the arrest was not made in accordance with the 
Rules, he shall:  
a. recommend the release of the person arrested 
or detained;  
b. note down the disposition of the referral 
document;  
c. prepare a brief memorandum indicating the 
reasons for the action taken; and  
d. forward the same, together with the record of 
the case, to the City or Provincial Prosecutor for 
appropriate action.  
 
Where the recommendation for the release of the 
detained person is approved by the City or 
Provincial Prosecutor but the evidence on hand 
warrant the conduct of a regular preliminary 
investigation, the order of release shall be served on 
the officer having custody of said detainee and shall 
direct the said officer to serve upon the detainee the 
subpoena or notice of preliminary investigation, 
together with the copies of the charge sheet or 
complaint, affidavits or sworn statements of the 

--- PAGE 50 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
50 
complainant and his witnesses and other supporting 
evidence. 
 
2017 Revised Manual for Prosecutors, Section 3.1.1. 
Concept — An inquest proceeding is an informal 
and summary investigation conducted by a public 
prosecutor in criminal cases involving persons 
arrested and detained without the benefit of a 
warrant of arrest issued by the court for the purpose 
of determining whether or not these persons 
should remain under custody and 
correspondingly be charged in court 
 
2017 Revised Manual for Prosecutors, Section 3.1.2. 
Coverage — The conduct of inquest proceedings 
covers the following:  
a. All offenses covered under the Revised Penal 
Code and special laws, rules and regulations which 
requires a preliminary investigation;  
b. Where respondent is a minor (below eighteen 
[18] years old), the inquest proceedings shall cover 
only offenses punishable by imprisonment of not 
less than six (6) years and one (1) day, provided 
that no inquest investigation shall be conducted 
unless the child–respondent shall have first 
undergone the requisite proceedings before the 
Local Social Welfare Development Officer 
pursuant to the Rules on Inquest with Respect to 
Children in Conflict With the Law (CICL). 
 
2017 Revised Manual for Prosecutors, Section 3.1.3. 
Designation of an Inquest Prosecutor. – The 
Prosecutor General or the Provincial/City 
Prosecutor shall designate the prosecutors assigned 
to inquest duties and their schedule of assignments. 
 
2017 Revised Manual for Prosecutors, Section 3.1.4. 
Venue of Inquest Cases. – Unless otherwise directed 
by the Prosecutor General or the Provincial/City 
Prosecutor, those assigned to inquest duties shall 
discharge their functions during the hours of their 
designated assignments at the office of the inquest 
prosecutor in order to expedite and facilitate the 
disposition of inquest cases, unless otherwise 
directed by the Head of Office. 
 
2017 Revised Manual for Prosecutors, Section 3.2. 
Procedure. – All complaints for inquest shall be 
received and docketed by the prosecution office 
concerned.  
 
Section 3.2.1. Commencement. – The inquest 
proceedings shall be considered commenced 
upon receipt by the inquest prosecutor of the 
following documents:  
a. Affidavit of arrest duly subscribed and sworn to 
before him/her by the arresting officer;  
b. Investigation report;  
c. Sworn statements of the complainant/s and 
witness/es; and  
d. Other supporting pieces of evidence gathered 
by the law enforcement authorities in the course of 
their investigation.  
 
Section 3.2.2. Incomplete Documents. – When the 
documents presented are incomplete to establish 
probable cause, the inquest prosecutor shall direct 
the law enforcement authorities to submit, in 
the proper form, the required evidence within 
the period prescribed under the provisions of 
Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code, as 
amended. Failure to submit the required evidence 
within the prescribed period shall constrain the 
inquest prosecutor to order the release of the 
detained person/s. 
 
Section 3.2.3. Instances Where the Presence of the 
Detained Person is Dispensed With. – The presence of 
the detained person shall be ensured during the 
proceedings except in the following cases:  
a. If he is confined in a hospital; or  
b. If he is detained in a place under maximum 
security.  
 
The inquest prosecutor shall reflect the absence of 
the detained person for any of the foregoing reasons 
in the record of the case. 
 
Section 3.2.4. Charges and Counter-Charges. – All 
charges and counter-charges arising from the same 
incident shall, as far as practicable, be jointly 
investigated and the conduct of the inquest 
proceedings be terminated, and be referred for 
further preliminary investigation. 
 
Section 3.2.6. Where the Arrest of the Detained Person 
was Properly Effected. – Should the inquest prosecutor 
find that the arrest was properly effected, the 
detained person shall be asked if he/she desires to 
avail himself/herself of a preliminary investigation 
and, if he/she does, the consequences thereof must 
be explained to him/her adequately.  
 
 
The detained person must be assisted by a lawyer of 
his/her own choice. If he/she has none, the inquest 
prosecutor shall provide him/her the services of a 
public attorney.  
 
The detained person, assisted by his/her lawyer, 
shall then be made to execute a waiver of the 
provisions of Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code, 
as amended.  
 
The preliminary investigation may be conducted by 
the inquest prosecutor himself/herself or by any 
other prosecutor to whom the case may be assigned 
by the Prosecutor General or the Provincial/City 
Prosecutor, which investigation shall be terminated 
within fifteen (15) days from its commencement. 
 
2017 Revised Manual for Prosecutors, Section 3.3 
Inquest Proper. – Where the detained person does 
not opt for a preliminary investigation or otherwise 
refuses to execute the required waiver, the inquest 
prosecutor shall proceed with the conduct of the 
inquest proceeding by examining the sworn 
statements/ affidavits of the complainant and the 
witnesses and other supporting evidence submitted. 
The conduct of an inquest proceeding should 

--- PAGE 51 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
51 
never be initiated in the absence of an affidavit 
of arrest.  
 
If necessary, the inquest prosecutor shall require the 
presence of the complaining witnesses and subject 
this witness to an informal and summary 
investigation or examination for the purposes of 
determining the existence of probable cause.  
 
Section 3.3.1. Action to be Taken When there is a finding 
of Probable Cause. – Probable cause has been defined 
as the existence of such facts and circumstances as 
would excite the belief, in a reasonable mind, acting 
on the facts within the knowledge of the prosecutor, 
that the person charged was guilty of the crime for 
which he/she was prosecuted. Probable cause is a 
reasonable ground of presumption that a matter is, 
or may be, well-founded, such a state of facts in the 
mind of the prosecutor as would lead a person of 
ordinary caution and prudence to believe, or 
entertain an honest or strong suspicion, that a thing 
is so. 
 
If the inquest prosecutor finds that probable cause 
exists, he/she shall forthwith prepare the resolution 
with the corresponding Complaint/Information 
with the recommendation that the same be filed in 
court. The Complaint/Information shall indicate the 
offense/s committed and the amount of bail 
recommended, if applicable. However, in inquest 
cases for crimes covered by the Rules on Summary 
Procedure and Republic Act No. 603610 where no 
bail is required, the inquest prosecutor shall 
recommend the release of the arrested person and 
prepare the Information for filing with the court.  
 
Thereafter, the record of the case, together with the 
resolution and the Complaint/Information, shall be 
forwarded to the Prosecutor General or the 
Provincial/City Prosecutor for approval and 
subsequent filing before the proper Court. 
 
Section 3.3.2. Action to be Taken When There is an 
Absence of Probable Cause. – If the inquest prosecutor 
finds no probable cause to indict the 
arrested/detained person, he/she shall:  
 
a. Recommend the release of the arrested or 
detained person;  
b. Prepare a resolution of dismissal indicating 
therein the reason/s for the action taken; and  
c. Forward the record of the case to the 
Prosecutor General or the Provincial/City 
Prosecutor for their appropriate action. 
 
GR: the inquest proceedings must be terminated 
within the period prescribed, which will be counted 
from the time the arrest under the provisions of Article 
125 of the Revised Penal Code 
XPN: When there is a waiver for the purpose of 
preliminary investigation 
 
Revised Penal Code 
Art. 125. Delay in the delivery of detained persons to the 
proper judicial authorities. — The penalties provided in 
the next preceding article shall be imposed upon the 
public officer or employee who shall detain any 
person for some legal ground and shall fail to deliver 
such person to the proper judicial authorities within 
the period of; twelve (12) hours, for crimes or 
offenses punishable by light penalties, or their 
equivalent; eighteen (18) hours, for crimes or 
offenses punishable by correctional penalties, or 
their equivalent and thirty-six (36) hours, for 
crimes, or offenses punishable by afflictive or 
capital penalties, or their equivalent. 
 
In every case, the person detained shall be informed 
of the cause of his detention and shall be allowed 
upon his request, to communicate and confer at any 
time with his attorney or counsel. 
 
In case of  
1) violation of the Human Security Act within 72 
hours, which is now extended to 14 calendar 
days under the Anti-Terror Law. 
2) violation of the anti-smuggling laws, and for 
violations of the dangerous drugs act, if the 
result of the inquest leads to dismissal, then it 
is subject to automatic review to the 
Secretary of Justice. 
3) For Sandiganbayan cases, should any 
complaint cognizable by the Sandiganbayan be 
referred to the Office of the Prosecutor 
General or City/Provincial Prosecutor's Office 
for the conduct of inquest proceedings, the 
latter shall refrain from accepting the same 
and shall advise the law enforcer to file the 
complaint before the Office of the 
Ombudsman or the Office of the Special 
Prosecutor through any of the branch clerk of 
court in the locality concerned 
 
RULES: 
GR: ( PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION) 
preliminary investigation is required to be conducted 
before the filing of a compliant or information for 
an offense where the penalty prescribed by law is at 
least four (4) years, two (2) months and one (1) day 
without regard to the fine 
 
XPN: ( INQUEST PROCEEDINGS) When a 
person is lawfully arrested without a warrant 
involving an offense which requires a preliminary 
investigation, the complaint or information may be 
filed by a prosecutor without need of such 
investigation provided an inquest has been 
conducted in accordance with existing rules.  
 
XPN of XPN: ( DIRECT FILING TO THE 
COURT) In the absence or unavailability of an 
inquest prosecutor, the complaint may be filed by 
the offended party or a peace officer directly with 
the proper court on the basis of the affidavit of the 
offended party or arresting officer or person. 
 Before the complaint or information is 
filed, the person arrested may ask for 

--- PAGE 52 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
52 
a preliminary investigation in 
accordance with this Rule, but he must 
sign a waiver of the provision of 
Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code, 
as amended, in the presence of his 
counsel. 
- Notwithstanding the signing of the 
waiver, if the person requested 
preliminary investigation, he can 
already apply for bail, if bail is a matter 
of right. 
- an offshoot of the preliminary 
investigation. It must be terminated 
within 15 days from its inception 
 After the filing of the complaint or 
information in court without a 
preliminary investigation, the accused 
may, within five (5) days from the 
time he learns of its filing, ask for a 
preliminary investigation with the 
same right to adduce evidence in his 
defense as provided in this Rule. 
 
Section 7. Records. —  
(a) Records supporting the information or 
complaint. — An information or complaint filed in 
court shall be supported by the affidavits and 
counter-affidavits of the parties and their witnesses, 
together with the other supporting evidence and the 
resolution on the case.  
 
(b) Record of preliminary investigation. — The 
record of the preliminary investigation conducted by 
a prosecutor OR OTHER OFFICERS AS MAY BE 
AUTHORIZED BY LAW shall not form part of 
the record of the case. However, the court, on its 
own initiative or on motion of any party, may order 
the production of the record or any of its part when 
necessary in the resolution of the case or any 
incident therein, or when it is to be introduced as an 
evidence in the case by the requesting party. (8a) (As 
amended by A.M. No. 05-8-26-SC). 
 
1) Records supporting the information or 
complaint - will be taken judicial notice of by 
the court and there needs no other proof as to 
its existence 
2) Records of the preliminary investigation - 
not included in the document supporting the 
complaint or information, must be duly 
presented in court 
 
Section 8. Cases not requiring a preliminary investigation 
nor covered by the Rule on Summary Procedure. —  
(a) If filed with the prosecutor. — If the complaint 
is filed directly with the prosecutor involving an 
offense punishable by an imprisonment of less than 
four (4) years, two (2) months and one (1) day, 
the procedure outlined in section 3(a) of this Rule 
shall be observed. The prosecutor shall act on the 
complaint based on the affidavits and other 
supporting documents submitted by the 
complainant within ten (10) days from its filing.  
 
(b) If filed with the Municipal Trial Court. — If 
the complaint or information is filed with the 
Municipal Trial Court or Municipal Circuit Trial 
Court for an offense covered by this section, the 
procedure in section 3(a) of this rule shall be 
observed. If within ten (10) days after the filing of 
the complaint of information, the judge finds no 
probable cause after personally evaluating the 
evidence, or after personally examining in 
writing and under oath the complainant and his 
witnesses in the form of searching questions 
and answers, he shall dismiss the same. He may, 
however, require the submission of additional 
evidence, within ten (10) days from notice, to 
determine further the existence of probable 
cause. If the judge still finds no probable cause 
despite the additional evidence, he shall, within ten 
(10) days from its submission or expiration of said 
period, dismiss the case. When he finds probable 
cause, he shall issue a warrant of arrest, or a 
commitment order if the accused had already 
been arrested, and hold him for trial. However, if 
the judge is satisfied that there is no necessity for 
placing the accused under custody, he may issue 
summons instead of a warrant of arrest. (9a) 
 
Rule 112, Section 3. Procedure. — The preliminary 
investigation shall be conducted in the following 
manner:  
(a) If filed with the prosecutor. — The complaint 
shall state the address of the respondent and shall 
be accompanied by the affidavits of the 
complainant and his witnesses, as well as other 
supporting documents to establish probable 
cause. They shall be in such number of copies as 
there are respondents, plus two (2) copies for the 
official file. The affidavits shall be subscribed and 
sworn to before any prosecutor or government 
official authorized to administer oath, or, in their 
absence or unavailability, before a notary public, 
each of who must certify that he personally 
examined the affiants and that he is satisfied that 
they voluntarily executed and understood their 
affidavits. 
 
Application 
Includes cases which do not require the conduct of a 
preliminary investigation. These are offenses  
1) with the penalty prescribed by law as 
imprisonment for not more than 4 years and 2 
months, without regard to fine; or  
2) those offenses covered by a summary 
procedure which we will know by process of 
elimination. 
 
Rules 
Under Section 3(A), the prosecutor doesn’t need to 
follow b,c,d,e,and f. The determination of the probable 
cause under cases which do not require preliminary 
investigation; may rely solely on the complaints and the 
affidavits and supporting evidences provided for by the 
complainant. But this is not to say that public 
prosecutor is constrained to just rely on the 

--- PAGE 53 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
53 
complainant’s point of view because the public 
prosecutor has actually a leeway or discretion to 
conduct a full-blown preliminary investigation. After 
they received the complaint, affidavit of witnesses and 
other supporting documents, then they can resolve it 
within 10 days, without asking for a counteraffidavit 
from the respondent 
 
Under Sec 8(B) (If filed with the Municipal Trial 
Court), these are the cases which do not need 
preliminary investigations and those not covered by the 
rule on summary procedure. It is directly filed in the 
Municipal Trial Court, Municipal Circuit Trial Court, 
Metropolitan Trial Court, or a First Level Court. 
Because it is already filed in a court of law, it is already 
judicial in nature; the proceedings that will be 
undertaken by the judge will be considered a 
preliminary investigation. 
 
Preliminary examination 
RTC MTC 
personally evaluating the complaint, affidavits, the 
supporting documents within 10 days after the filing 
of the complaint or information, no duty to call on 
the complainant and the witnesses to determine 
probable cause 
order the prosecutor to 
present additional 
evidence within 5 days 
from notice 
require the submission 
of additional evidence 
within 10 days from 
notice to determine 
further the existence of 
probable cause. 
no duty to personally 
examine in writing or 
under oath the 
complainant and his 
witnesses in the form of 
searching questions. 
after personally 
evaluating the evidence, 
the MTC judge can 
already issue the warrant 
of arrest when by the 
evidence alone, he finds 
probable cause. 
 
What are those offenses covered by the Revised 
Rules on Summary Procedure?  
1) Violations of traffic laws, rules and regulations;  
2) Violations of the rental law;  
3) Violations of municipal or city ordinances;  
4) Violations of B.P. Blg. 22 (Bouncing Checks 
Law);  
5) 5) All other criminal cases where the penalty 
prescribed by law for the offense charged is 
imprisonment not exceeding six months, 
or a fine not exceeding one thousand pesos 
(P1,000.00), or both irrespective of other 
imposable penalties, accessory or otherwise, or 
of the civil liability arising therefrom: Provided, 
however, That in offenses involving damage 
to property through criminal negligence, this 
Rule shall govern where the imposable fine 
does not exceed ten thousand pesos 
(P10,000.00). 
 
Procedure for summary procedure 
1) File a complaint or information directly in 
court 
XPN: Metro Manila and other chartered city 
the filing shall be of an information (not a 
complaint) 
XPN of XPN: Unless criminal case it cannot 
be prosecuted de officio (ACASA) 
2) The complaint or information shall be 
accompanied by the affidavits of the 
complainants and its witnesses in such number 
of copies as there are accused plus two copies 
for the court’s files. This requirement has to be 
complied with within five (5) days from the 
filing of the case otherwise, the same may be 
dismissed. 
3) • Under Sec. 13 of the Revised Rules on 
Summary Procedure, should the court find no 
cause or ground to hold the accused for trial, it 
shall order the dismissal of the case. If there is 
a ground to hold the accused for trial, the court 
shall set the case for arraignment and trial.  
 Further, if the accused is in custody for 
the crime charged, he shall be 
immediately arraigned if he enters a 
plea of guilty, he shall forthwith be 
sentenced.  
 when during the arraignment, the 
accused pleads not guilty then it will 
now proceed with the Preliminary 
Conference 
4) In Preliminary conference there will be 
stipulation of facts, he may also apply for plea 
bargaining and/or to take up other matters or 
issues to clarify to insure a speedy disposition 
of the case. (Sec. 14 of Revised Rule on 
Summary Procedure) 
5) during the Trial, the affidavits of the witnesses 
and even the complainant will be considered as 
the direct testimonies to be offered, subject to 
the cross examination, redirect examination 
and re-cross examination. (Sec. 15 of Revised 
Rule on Summary Procedure) 
6) Court is mandated not to order the arrest of the 
accused except when the ground is failure to 
appear when required by the Court. So, if he is 
arrested because he was not able to attend trial, 
he may still be released if he applies for bail or 
he is granted recognizance. (Sec. 16 of 
Revised Rule on Summary Procedure) 
 
ARREST 
 
RULE 113 
Section 1. Definition of arrest. – Arrest is the taking of 
a person in custody in order that he may be bound 
to answer for the commission of an offense. 
 
Section 2. Arrest; how made. – An arrest is made by 
an actual restraint of a person to be arrested, or by 
his submission to the custody of the person making 
the arrest. No violence or unnecessary force shall be 

--- PAGE 54 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
54 
used in making an arrest. The person arrested shall 
not be subject to a greater restraint than is 
necessary for his detention. 
 
Arrest - is the taking of a person into custody in order 
that he may be bound to answer for the commission of 
an offense. Arrest is the taking under real or assumed 
authority, custody of another for the purpose of 
holding or detaining him to answer to a criminal charge 
 
Sec. 2, Art. III of the 1987 Constitution. “xxx no 
search warrant or warrant of arrest shall issue except 
upon probable cause to be determined personally by 
the judge after examination under oath or 
affirmation of the complainant, and the witnesses he 
may produce and particularly describing the place to 
be searched and the person or things to be seized.“ 
 
Jurisprudence holds that an arrest without probable 
cause is an unreasonable seizure of a person, and 
violates the privacy of persons, which ought not to be 
intruded by the State. Hence, the existence of probable 
cause is a vital element to the validity of a warrant of 
arrest. 
 
Procedures to be taken by RTC or MTC before he 
may issue a warrant of arrest 
Preliminary examination 
RTC MTC 
Sec 5a, Rule 112 Sec 8b, Rule 112 
personally evaluating the complaint, affidavits, the 
supporting documents within 10 days after the filing 
of the complaint or information, no duty to call on 
the complainant and the witnesses to determine 
probable cause 
no duty to personally 
examine in writing or 
under oath the 
complainant and his 
witnesses in the form of 
searching questions. 
 
Only the resolution of 
the prosecutor and the 
supporting evidence 
after personally 
evaluating the evidence 
in the form of searching 
questions., the MTC 
judge can already issue 
the warrant of arrest 
when by the evidence 
alone, he finds probable 
cause. 
order the prosecutor to 
present additional 
evidence within 5 days 
from notice 
require the submission 
of additional evidence 
within 10 days from 
notice to determine 
further the existence of 
probable cause. 
 
Meaning of Probable Cause for the issuance of a 
Warrant of Arrest  
For the purpose of the warrant of arrest, probable 
cause is defined as such facts and circumstances which 
would lead a reasonably discreet and prudent man to 
believe that an offense has been committed by the 
person sought to be arrested. 
 
Probable cause 
Warrant of arrest Guilt of the accused 
Less stringent Stringent 
 
Unnecessary violence 
GR: no violence or unnecessary force shall be used in 
making an arrest and the person arrested shall not be 
subject to a greater restraint and is necessary for his 
detention. 
XPN: in some instances when the person to be 
arrested, after going through the motions or the 
procedures of the arrest, do not evade the arrest or is 
willing to be taken into custody there is actually no 
necessity to handcuff the person being arrested. 
XPN of XPN: if there is a violent exchange or if the 
person being arrested is resisting or is trying to evade, 
or that the police officer or the arresting officer has 
reasonable belief that the person being arrested may be 
harmful or is capable of harming the arresting officer, 
then based on the best discretion of the arresting 
officer, forms of restraints such as the handcuffs may 
be applied accordingly. 
 
Probable cause 
Prelimina
ry 
investigat
ion 
Issuance 
of warrant 
of arrest 
Warrantle
ss arrest 
Search 
warrant  
pertains to 
the facts 
and 
circumstan
ces 
sufficient 
to support 
a well-
founded 
belief that 
a crime has 
been 
committed 
and the 
accused is 
probably 
guilty 
thereof 
 
such facts 
and 
circumstan
ces which 
would lead 
a 
reasonably 
discreet 
and 
prudent 
man to 
believe 
that an 
offense 
has been 
committed 
by the 
person 
sought to 
be 
arrested. 
a 
reasonable 
ground of 
suspicion 
supported 
by 
circumstan
ces 
sufficiently 
strong in 
themselves 
to warrant 
a cautious 
man’s 
belief that 
the person 
accused is 
guilty of 
the offense 
with which 
he is 
charged 
as such 
facts and 
circumstan
ces which 
would lead 
a 
reasonably 
discreet 
and 
prudent 
man to 
believe 
that an 
offense 
has been 
committed 
and that 
the object 
sought in 
the 
connection 
with the 
offense are 
in the 
place 
sought to 
be 
searched. 
 
voluntary surrender or voluntary submission into 
the custody of the person or persons tasked to effect 
the arrest may be considered a mitigating 
circumstance if you refer back to your Revised Penal 
Code. 
 
Conferring jurisdiction 
Arrest, when valid, vests jurisdiction to the court over 
the person of the accused. To emphasize, it is the arrest 

--- PAGE 55 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
55 
of the person and not the issuance of a warrant of 
arrest. 
 
It is the valid arrest of the person or the voluntary 
submission or appearance in court, which vests 
jurisdiction over the person of the accused. It is not the 
issuance of the warrant of arrest. 
 
Description of the person 
 Section 2 of Article III, 1987 
Constitution 
 The issuance of a general warrant or a 
warrant which do not particularly 
describe or particularly name the 
person to be seized or even the 
issuance of a warrant to several persons 
who cannot be identified is clearly a 
violation of the Constitution. 
 if a person subject of a warrant of arrest 
is only identified by his nickname or by 
an appellation by which he is known, 
he must be described in the warrant of 
arrest with particularity, such that the 
person who will effect the arrest using 
the warrant of arrest may be able to 
zero in or identify the person of the 
accused or the person to be arrested. 
 
Section 3. Duty of arresting officer. — It shall be the 
duty of the officer executing the warrant to arrest the 
accused and to deliver him to the nearest police 
station or jail without unnecessary delay. 
 
Section 4. Execution of warrant. — The head of the 
office to whom the warrant of arrest was delivered 
for execution shall cause the warrant to be executed 
within ten (10) days from its receipt. Within ten 
(10) days after the expiration of the period, the 
officer to whom it was assigned for execution shall 
make a report to the judge who issued the warrant. 
In case of his failure to execute the warrant, he shall 
state the reasons therefor. 
 
Lifetime of the warrant of arrest 
It shall remain valid and effective so long as it has not 
been recalled or the person named therein has not been 
arrested or has not submitted himself to the 
jurisdiction of the court. The validity of the warrant 
continues even if the officer assigned to execute has 
made a negative return to the issuing court. 
 
Section 4, on the execution of warrant, the timeframes 
there are only to ensure that there is dispatch in the 
execution of the warrant of arrest. If there is failure to 
execute the warrant of arrest then based on Section 4, 
the person or the enforcement officer assigned to 
execute the warrant shall only make a report to the 
judge who made or issued the warrant. In case there is 
failure to execute the warrant, he is duty bound to state 
the reasons therefore. 
 
GR: warrant of arrest does not expire 
XPN: it is recalled or there is a voluntary submission 
of the person to be arrested to the jurisdiction of the 
court. 
 
Duties of the arresting officer (People v. Mahinay) 
At the time a person is arrested it shall be the duty of 
the arresting officer  
1) The person arrested, detained, invited or under 
custodial investigation must be informed in a 
language known to and understood by him of 
the reason for the arrest, and he must be shown 
the warrant of arrest if any, every other 
warnings information or communication must 
be in a language known to and understood by 
said person.  
 
Take note, however, that under the last 
sentence of Section 7 of Rule 113, the officer 
need not have the warrant in his possession at 
the time of the arrest, but after the arrest if the 
person arrested so requires the warrant shall be 
shown to him as soon as practicable.  
 
Under the first guideline, if the arresting officer 
has in his custody the warrant of arrest then, 
when the arresting officer explains to the 
person being arrested the reason for his 
arrest, he can already show the warrant of 
arrest. But if, for example, it is not in his 
custody as of the moment of the arrest then, 
Section 7 of Rule 113 will apply.  
2) He must be warned that he has the right to 
remain silent, and that any statement he makes 
may be used as evidence against him.  
3) He must be informed that he has the right to 
be assisted at all times and have the presence of 
an independent and competent lawyer 
preferably of his own choice.  
4) He must be informed that if he has no lawyer 
or cannot afford the services of a lawyer, one 
will be provided for him, and that a lawyer may 
also be engaged by any person in his behalf, or 
may be appointed by the court upon petition 
of the person arrested, or one acting in his 
behalf.  
5) That whether or not the person arrested has a 
lawyer, he must be informed that no custodial 
investigation in any form shall be conducted 
except in the presence of his counsel, or after a 
valid waiver has been made. Take note that the 
waiver of the right to be represented by counsel 
must be in writing and must be signed in the 
presence of counsel.  
6) The person arrested must be informed that at 
any time he has a right to communicate or 
confer by the most expedient means - 
telephone, radio, letter or messenger - with his 
lawyer, either retained or appointed, any 
member of his immediate family, or any 
medical doctor, priest or minister chosen by 
him or by anyone from his immediate family or 

--- PAGE 56 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
56 
by his counsel, or be visited by, or confer with 
duly accredited national or international non-
government organization. It shall be the 
responsibility of the officer to ensure that this 
is accomplished.  
7) He must be informed that he has the right to 
waive any of the said rights provided it is made 
voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently and 
ensure that he understood the same.  
8) In addition, if the person arrested waives his 
right to a lawyer, he must be informed that it 
must be done in writing and in the presence of 
counsel, otherwise, he must be warned that the 
waiver is void even if he insists on his waiver 
and chooses to speak.  
9) The person arrested must be informed that he 
may indicate in any manner at any time or stage 
of the process that he does not wish to be 
questioned with warning, that once he makes 
such indication that indication, the police may 
not interrogate him if the same had not yet 
commenced, or the interrogation must cease if 
it has already begun.  
10) The person arrested must be informed that his 
initial waiver of his right to remain silent, the 
right to counsel or any of his rights does not 
bar him from invoking it at any time during the 
process, regardless of whether he may have 
answered some questions or volunteered some 
statements.  
11) He must also be informed that any statement 
or evidence, as the case may be, obtained in 
violation of any of the foregoing, whether 
inculpatory or exculpatory, in whole or in part, 
shall be inadmissible in evidence. 
 
It is not enough for the person arresting to merely 
repeat to the person under investigation the provisions 
of Section 12, Art. 3 of the 1987 Constitution. The 
former must also explain the effects of such provision 
in practical terms. 
 
Art. 125. Delay in the delivery of detained persons 
to the proper judicial authorities. – The penalties 
provided in the next preceding article shall be 
imposed upon the public officer or employee who 
shall detain any person for some legal ground and 
shall fail to deliver such person to the proper judicial 
authorities within the period of: twelve (12) hours, 
for crimes or offenses punishable by light penalties, 
or their equivalent; eighteen (18) hours, for crimes 
or offenses punishable by correctional penalties, or 
their equivalent; and thirty-six (36) hours, for crimes 
or offenses punishable by afflictive or capital 
penalties, or their equivalent. 
 
Section 5. Arrest without warrant; when lawful. — A 
peace officer or a private person may, without a 
warrant, arrest a person:  
(a) When, in his presence, the person to be arrested 
has committed, is actually committing, or is 
attempting to commit an offense; [what is otherwise 
known as in flagrante delicto arrest]  
(b) When an offense has just been committed, and 
he has probable cause to believe based on personal 
knowledge of facts or circumstances that the person 
to be arrested has committed it; [otherwise known 
as “hot pursuit arrest”] and  
(c) When the person to be arrested is a prisoner who 
has escaped from a penal establishment or place 
where he is serving final judgment or is temporarily 
confined while his case is pending, or has escaped 
while being transferred from one confinement to 
another. In cases falling under paragraph (a) and (b) 
above, the person arrested without a warrant shall be 
forthwith delivered to the nearest police station or 
jail and shall be proceeded against in accordance 
with Section 7 of Rule 112. (5a) 
 
Warrantless arrests 
Warrantless arrest is a seizure of person without a 
warrant but based on probable cause that he has 
committed a felony or has escaped from confinement. 
 
“to hold that no criminal can, in any case, be arrested 
and searched for the evidence and tokens of his 
crime without a warrant, would be to leave society, 
to a large extent, at the mercy of the shrewdest, the 
most expert, and the most depraved of criminals, 
facilitating their escape in many instances. (Umil v. Ramos) 
 
IN FLAGRANTE DELICTO 
A peace officer or private person may, without a 
warrant, arrest a person when  
1) in his presence, the person to be arrested has 
committed, is actually committing, or is 
attempting to commit an offense 
2) The arresting officer therefore must have 
personal knowledge of such fact or personal 
knowledge of facts and circumstances 
convincingly indicative or constitutive of 
probable cause. 
 
Elements 
1) The person to be arrested must execute an 
overt act indicating that he has just committed, 
is actually committing, or is attempting to 
commit a crime; and  
2) Such overt act is done in the presence or 
within the view of the arresting officer or 
private person 
 It must be stressed that the presence 
not only requires that the arresting 
person sees the offense, but also when 
he hears the disturbance created 
thereby and proceeds at once to the 
scene. 
 
An arrest made after an entrapment operation 
does not require a warrant in as much as it is 
considered as a valid warrantless arrest. Considering 
that an arrest was lawfully made, the search 

--- PAGE 57 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
57 
incidental to such arrest was also valid (People v. Collado) 
 
It should be stressed that the Supreme Court has 
already ruled that a buy-bust operation is a form of 
entrapment which has repeatedly been accepted to 
be a valid means of arresting violators of the 
Dangerous Drugs Law.   
 
The justification that underlies the legitimacy of the 
buy-bust operation is that the suspect is arrested in 
flagrante delicto – that is the suspect has just 
committed or is in the act of committing or is 
attempting to commit the offense in the presence of 
the arresting police officer or private person.  
 
The arresting police officer or private person is 
favored in such an instance with a presumption of 
regularity in the performance of official duties  
(People v. Andaya) 
 
When the accused was arrested while merely talking 
to a police informant, and there was no overt act 
indicative of a felonious enterprise that could be 
properly attributed to the said accused to arouse 
suspicion in the mind of the arresting officer that the 
accused has just committed, was actually 
committing, or was attempting to commit a crime, 
the warrantless arrest was not valid. 
 
As testified to by the arresting officer himself in the 
same case, the accused and the informant were just 
talking to each other and there was no exchange of 
money and drugs when he approached the car. He 
also admitted on cross-examination that he had no 
personal knowledge on whether there was a 
prohibited drug and gun inside the vehicle of the 
accused when he approached (People v. Edaño) 
 
The police claims that they were alerted when they 
saw two unidentified men suddenly rush out of a 
house and since they suspected that a crime had 
been committed, the natural thing for them to do 
was to give chase to the jeep that the two fleeing men 
boarded given that the officers were in a patrol car 
and a tricycle.  
 
Although running after the fleeing suspect was the 
more urgent task, the officer instead gave priority to 
the house even when they heard no cry for help from 
it.  
 
Admittedly, the police officer did not notice 
anything amiss going on the house from the street 
where they stood. Now, even if they peek through 
the partially open door of the house, they saw no 
activity that warranted them entering it.  
 
Clearly, no crime was plainly exposed to the view 
of the arresting officer that authorize the arrest 
of the accused without a warrant. (Antiquera v. People) 
 
The mere act of darting away when approached by a 
police officer should not be construed against the 
accused. Flight per se is not synonymous with 
guilt and must not always be attributed to one's 
consciousness of guilt.  
 
Flight is not a reliable indicator of guilt without other 
circumstances. An attempt to run away from an 
officer is susceptible to various explanation; it could 
signify guilt or may signify innocence. There are 
many innocent reasons for flight like fear or 
retribution for speaking to an officer, unwillingness 
to appear as witness, and fear of being apprehended 
even if he is innocent.  
 
Also, the act of walking along the street and holding 
something in one's hand, even if they appeared to be 
dubious, coupled with his previous criminal charge 
for the same offense, are not by themselves 
sufficient to insight suspicion of criminal activity, or 
to create probable cause enough to justify a 
warrantless arrest. 
 
A previous criminal charge for the same offense are 
not by themselves sufficient to incite suspicion of 
criminal activity or to create probable cause enough 
to justify a warrantless arrest.  (People v. Villareal) 
 
Running away per se is not a crime and suspicion 
that a crime is being committed is not sufficient to 
establish probable cause. In In Flagrante Delicto 
cases, there should be a crime being committed and 
not a mere suspicion that a crime is being 
committed. 
 
suspicion that someone is committing a crime is not 
the same as having personal knowledge that a crime 
is being committed. 
 
The SC rejected the validity of an arrest made by an 
officer on the basis of his observation that the 
accused was standing around and showing improper 
and unpleasant movements. Such acts declared by 
the Supreme Court cannot be considered as criminal 
acts. At the time, the officer was aboard a 
motorcycle cruising at the speed of 30kph when he 
allegedly saw the accused while standing on the side 
of the street and handing over something to another 
at distance of 10m. The Court finds it is implausible 
even assuming that he had a perfect vision to have 
been able to identify minuscule amounts of 
crystalline substances inside two plastic sachets 
(Comerciante v. People) 
 
The arrest was made because of a mere tip of an 
informant and it became the reason for the 
warrantless arrest and the corresponding search that 
happened thereafter. 
 
The person arrested here was just descending from 
a ship holding a bag and there was no outward 
indication that he was committing any crime. 
 
The rule will be for tips of informants is that there 
should be probable cause to arrest a person before 
he can be validly arrested without warrant and 
thereafter searched. There must be an overt act of 

--- PAGE 58 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
58 
committing a crime to be the basis of probable cause 
in in flagrante delicto cases. (People v. Aminnudin) 
 
The allegations upon which the probable cause was 
based was that the person arrested was seen with his 
eyes moving fast and looking at every person passing 
by. Again, there is no crime being committed by the 
person arrested. (Malacat v. CA) 
 
There was a tip from a telephone call to the police 
by an alleged informer that there was a suspicious 
looking man where at a street corner at Tondo 
shortly before noon. The police operatives 
dispatched to the place so three men one of whom 
turned out to be Mengote who was looking from 
side to side clutching his abdomen- these were the 
“overt acts”. 
 
The Supreme Court ruled that there was nothing 
clandestine about him being on the street at the busy 
hour in the blaze of the noon day and by no stretch 
of imagination is looking from side to side and 
clutching his abdomen a criminal act. Thus, there 
was no valid warrantless arrest. (People v. Mengote) 
 
A day before the arrest the officers were informed 
that there was a schedule delivery of shabu by 
their employer WWW which will be done early in the 
morning and that he could be found at a certain 
apartment building in Malate, Manila. The police 
operatives decided to look for WWW to shed light 
for the illegal drug activities alleged by the employees 
and proceeded to the location of the apartment and 
placed the same under surveillance. When WWW 
came out of the apartment towards a parked car, two 
other police officers approached him and introduced 
themselves to him as police officers, asked his name 
and upon hearing that he’s WWW immediately 
frisked him and asked him to open the back 
compartment of the car. When frisked, there was 
found inside the front right pocket of WWW an 
unlicensed pistol and ammunitions.  
 
At the same time, the other members of the 
operatives searched the car and found inside it the ff 
items: transparent plastic bags of shabu, Php 650, 
000 cash, electronic and mechanical scales and 
another unlicensed pistol with magazine.  
 
The Supreme Court said that the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the case did not manifest 
any suspicious behavior on the part of WWW that 
would reasonably invite the attention of the police.  
 
He was merely walking from the apartment and was 
about to enter a parked car when the police 
operatives arrested him, frisked, and searched his 
person and commanded him to open the 
compartment of the car. He was not committing any 
visible offense then and the SC reiterated that 
reliable information alone absent any overt act 
indicative of a felonious enterprise in the 
presence and within the view of the arresting 
officers is not sufficient to constitute probable 
cause to justify an in flagrante delicto arrest. The 
SC concluded that there can be no valid warrantless 
arrest in in flagrante delicto under the facts and 
circumstances of the case. (People v. Laguio Jr) 
 
HOT PURSUIT ARREST 
A peace officer or private person may, without warrant, 
arrest a person when an offense has just been 
committed, and he has probable cause to believe, based 
on personal knowledge of facts or circumstances that 
the person to be arrested has committed it. 
 
Two conditions 
1) the person to be arrested must have just 
committed an offense; and  
2) the arresting peace officer or private person has 
probable cause to believe, based on 
personal knowledge of facts or 
circumstances that the person to be 
arrested is the one who committed the 
offense. 
 
In flagrante Hot pursuit 
require that the arresting 
officer or private person 
to personally witness the 
commission of the 
offence. 
does not require that the 
arresting officer or 
private person to 
personally witness the 
commission of the 
offence. In fact, the 
offense was not 
committed in his 
presence, although said 
offense as required by 
their rules has just been 
committed. 
No relation 
immediacy 
There must be a large 
measure of immediacy 
between the time the 
offense was committed 
and the time of the 
arrest. 
 
Personal knowledge 
This personal knowledge must amount to probable 
cause, which means actual belief or reasonable grounds 
of suspicion. The grounds of suspicion are reasonable 
when in the absence of actual belief of the arresting 
officers, the suspicion that a person arrested is 
probably guilty of committing the offense is based 
on actual facts 
 
The person making the arrest has personal knowledge 
of the fact that the crime was committed, because at 
the time of the arrest, he has a reasonably worthy 
information in his possession coupled with his own 
observation and fair inferences therefrom, that the 
person arrested has probably committed the offense. 
The arresting officer may even rely on information 
supplied by a witness or a victim of the crime. 
 
Two robbers divested the passenger of a Jeepney of 
their belongings, including a jacket of one passenger. 
The passengers immediately sought the help of a 

--- PAGE 59 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
59 
police officer, which form a team to track down the 
suspects. One of the passengers who went with the 
responding police officers saw one of the robbers 
casually walking in the same vicinity and wearing his 
jacket. The warrant of arrest of the accused was 
sustained by the court as well within the hot 
pursuit exception.  
 
So long as there was a continuous hot pursuit of that 
particular person who committed the crime, then it 
may be argued that it is still a valid warrantless arrest, 
even if it is made days after. (People v. Acol) 
 
The Valenzuela police station received a report of a 
mauling incident, which resulted in the death of the 
victim who received a massive skull fracture caused 
by a hard and heavy object.  
 
The court ruled that, based on their knowledge of 
the circumstances of the death of the victim, and 
the report of an eyewitness in arresting the 
accused, the officers had personal knowledge of 
facts leading them to believe that it was the accused 
who was one of the perpetrators of the crime. 
(People v. Gerente) 
 
The petitioner alleged that he was arrested based 
merely on information relayed to the police officers 
about a shooting incident and that they had at the 
time of the arrest no personal knowledge of the 
facts. The court found that as soon as the police 
received a phone call about a shooting incident, a 
team was dispatched to investigate. The 
investigation disclosed that a victim was wounded 
and that the witnesses tagged the petitioner as the 
one involved and that he had just left the scene of 
the crime. After tracking down the petitioner, he was 
invited to the police headquarters. But the petitioner 
who initially agreed, sped off prompting the 
authorities to give chase.  
 
The court ruled that the petitioners act of trying to 
get away, coupled with the incident report, which 
they investigated is enough to raise a reasonable 
suspicion on the part of the police authorities to the 
existence of probable cause. (Abelita v. Doria) 
 
Petitioner Robin Padilla figured in a hit and run 
accident with a Mitsubishi Pajero. The incident was 
witnessed by Manarang, a member of a civic group. 
Manarang rode this motorcycle and chased the 
petitioner. It was able to make out the plate number, 
PMA 777. He called the Viper through the radio, 
which flashed the message to all units of PNP 
Angeles City. PNP mobile patrols responded to the 
call and at Abacan Bridge Manarang found mobile 
three with SPO 2 Borja and SPO 2 Miranda. He 
informed them about the hit and run incident and he 
returned to where he came from until he saw the 
vehicle that figured in the incident, and he followed 
it. Soon the vehicle was within sight of SPO 2 Borja 
and Miranda of Mobile No. 3. They rode their 
mobile car and cut into the path of the vehicle 
forcing it to stop.  
 
The police officer requested petitioner to alight the 
vehicle. When he alighted with his hands raised, a 
gun tucked in the left of his waist was revealed. The 
gun was confiscated and his car was searched for 
weapons which turned out to contain firearms and 
ammunitions of assorted caliber. Petitioner insisted 
that his arrest was illegal, arguing that the arresting 
officer were not at the scene of the hit and run.  
 
The SC held that although the policemen who 
apprehended petitioner were not at the scene of the 
hit and run, such fact did not affect the propriety of 
the apprehension. It was in fact the most prudent 
action Manarang could have taken rather than 
collaring petitioner himself in as much as policemen 
are better trained in performing an arrest of suspects 
who, in this case is Robin Padilla. Petitioner could 
have put up a degree of resistance which an 
untrained civilian could not contain without putting 
himself in danger.  
 
In that case, there was a valid arrest in hot pursuit 
because the witness to the hit and run informed the 
police officers of the plate number of the car which 
caused the hit and run, thus, the policemen called 
went after the said vehicle. When the vehicle was 
cornered, Robin Padilla alighted. Therefore, there 
were crucial facts and circumstances that would lead 
a prudent man to believe that the hit and run was 
committed by person driving the vehicle who is 
probably guilty of committing the crime. (Padilla v. 
CA) 
 
ARREST OF ESCAPED PRISONERS 
When the person to be arrested is a prisoner who has  
1) escaped from a penal establishment or place 
where he is serving final judgment or is 
temporarily confined while his case is pending, 
or  
2) has escaped while being transferred from one 
confinement to another 
3) An accused who files a fake bail bond is 
considered not merely to have jumped bail but 
for all intents and purposes, to have escaped 
from detention, thus, such accused may be 
rearrested without warrant. 
 
Revised Rule of Criminal Procedure 
1) An accused released on bail may be re-
arrested without a necessity of a warrant if 
he attempts to depart from the Philippines 
without permission of the court where the case 
is pending. 
2) For the purpose of surrendering the accused 
the bondsman may arrest him, or upon 
written authority endorsed on a certified copy 
of the undertaking, cause him to be arrested by 
a police officer or any other person of suitable 
age and discretion. (Section 23 of rule 114) 
3) If a person lawfully arrested escapes or is 
rescued, any person may immediately pursue 
or take him without a warrant at any time and 

--- PAGE 60 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
60 
in any place within the Philippines (Section 13 
of Rule 113). 
 
Custodial investigation 
Under RA No. 7438, the so called invitation of a 
person in connection with an offense he is suspected 
to have committed is a prohibited act for which the 
inviting officer may be held liable under sections 2(f) 
and 4 of RA No. 7438. 
 
The mere invitation is already covered by the 
prescription on warrantless arrest because it is intended 
for no other reason than to conduct a custodial 
investigation. 
 
Custodial investigation shall already include the 
practice of issuing an invitation to a person who is 
investigated in connection with an offense he is 
suspected to have committed. 
 
This means even those who voluntarily surrender 
before a police officer must be apprised of their 
Miranda rights for the same pressures: whether you 
were invited or you were arrested or you voluntarily 
went there, the same pressures of custodial setting exist 
in whatever scenario. 
 
Section 6. Time of making arrest. – An arrest may be 
made on any day and at any time of the day or 
night. 
 
Section 7. Method of arrest by officer by virtue of warrant. 
– When making an arrest by virtue of a warrant, the 
officer shall inform the person to be arrested of 
the cause of the arrest and the fact that a warrant 
has been issued for his arrest, except when he 
flees or forcibly resists before the officer has 
opportunity to so inform him, or when the 
giving of such information will imperil the 
arrest. The officer need not have the warrant in 
his possession at the time of the arrest but after 
the arrest, if the person arrested so requires, the 
warrant shall be shown to him as soon as practicable. 
 
GR: When making an arrest by virtue of a warrant, 
the officer shall inform the person to be arrested of 
the  
1) cause of the arrest and  
2) the fact that a warrant has been issued for his 
arrest 
 
XPN:  
1) When the accused flees or forcibly resist before 
the officer has opportunity to inform him 
2) when the giving of such information will 
imperil the arrest 
 
Sec. 8. Method of arrest by officer without warrant. – 
When making an arrest without a warrant, the officer 
shall inform the person to be arrested of his 
authority and the cause of the arrest, unless the 
latter is either engaged in the commission of an 
offense, is pursued immediately after its 
commission, has escaped, flees, or forcibly resists 
before the officer has opportunity to so inform him, 
or when the giving of such information will imperil 
the arrest. 
 
Section. 9. Method of arrest by private person. – 
When making an arrest, a private person shall inform 
the person to be arrested of the intention to arrest 
him and the cause of the arrest, unless the latter is 
either engaged in the commission of an offense, is 
pursued immediately after its commission, or has 
escaped, flees, or forcibly resists before the person 
making the arrest has opportunity to so inform him, 
or when the giving of such information will imperil 
the arrest 
 
Peace officer Private person 
when making the arrest, 
the officer shall inform 
the person to be arrested 
of his authority. 
inform the person to be 
arrested of the intention 
to arrest him. 
Inform the person of the cause of the arrest 
 
XPN:  
1) when he is pursued immediately after the 
commission of the crime;  
2) when he escapes, flees, or forcibly resists 
before the officer or person making the 
arrest has opportunity to so inform him; or  
3) when the giving of such information will 
imperil the arrest 
May summon assistance May not summon 
assistance 
 
Section 10. Officer may summon assistance. — An 
officer making a lawful arrest may orally summon as 
many persons as he deems necessary to assist him in 
effecting the arrest. Every person so summoned by 
an officer shall assist him in effecting the arrest when 
he can render such assistance without detriment to 
himself. 
 
Application 
applicable whether there is a warrant of arrest or if it is 
the valid warrantless arrest 
 
In relation to Art 149 
All persons who come to the aid of agents of authority 
and also all public functionaries are entitled to be 
considered as agents of authority. It being 
understood nevertheless that in order that the person 
who comes to the aid of agents of authority may be 
considered as agents of authority, it is essential 
condition that they lend assistance by virtue of an 
order or request of such agent of authority. 
Accordingly, these persons are given the protection of 
Article 149 of the Revised Penal Code wherein if 
attacked, the offender will be liable for indirect assault. 
 
Section 11. Right of officer to break into building or 
enclosure. — An officer, in order to make an arrest 
either by virtue of a warrant, or without a warrant as 
provided in Section 5, may break into any building 

--- PAGE 61 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
61 
or enclosure where the person to be arrested is or is 
reasonably believed to be, if he is refused 
admittance thereto, after announcing his 
authority and purpose. 
 
Section 12. Right to break out from building or 
enclosure. — Whenever an officer has entered the 
building or enclosure in accordance with the 
preceding section, he may break out therefrom 
when necessary to liberate himself. 
 
An officer can break into a building or enclosure if:  
1) He has announced his authority to affect the 
arrest  
2) He has announced his purpose in making the 
arrest  
3) He is refused admittance after the foregoing 
announcements 
 
Section 13. Arrest after escape or rescue. – If a person 
lawfully arrested escaped or is rescued, any person 
may immediately pursue or if they take him 
without a warrant at any time in any place within 
the Philippines. 
  
The situation here is, this is no longer in flagrante 
delicto arrest or hot pursuit arrest or arrest of an 
escapee already in jail. There's no need to apply for 
another warrant of arrest just to re-arrest that person 
validly arrested. 
 
Section 14. Right of attorney or relative to visit person 
arrested. — Any member of the Philippine Bar shall, 
at the request of the person arrested or of another 
acting in his behalf, have the right to visit and confer 
privately with such person in the jail or any other 
place of custody at any hour of the day or night. 
Subject to reasonable regulations, a relative of the 
person arrested can also exercise the same right. 
 
Rule 
Attorney - he can access his client at any day and at 
any hour, day or night 
Relative and those who are allowed to confer with 
the accused under RA 7438 - within reasonable time 
based on the regulation of the prison or the detention 
facility where he is  
 
The person's immediate family shall include his or her 
spouse, fiancé, parent, child, brother or sister, 
grandparent or grandchild, uncle or aunt, nephew or 
niece and guardian or award. 
 
Sec 4, RA 7438 
xxx (b) Any person who obstructs, prevents or 
prohibits any lawyer, any member of the immediate 
family of a person arrested, detained or under 
custodial investigation, or any medical doctor or 
priest or religious minister chosen by him or by any 
member of his immediate family or by his counsel, 
from visiting and conferring privately with him, or 
from examining and treating him, or from 
ministering to his spiritual needs, at any hour of the 
day or, in urgent cases, of the night shall suffer the 
penalty of imprisonment of not less than four (4) 
years nor more than six (6) years, and a fine of 
four thousand pesos (P4,000.00). xxx 
 
POSSIBLE REMEDIES AGAINST ILLEGAL 
ARREST 
1) He or any person in his behalf may file a 
verified petition for habeas corpus before the 
proper court if no complaint or information is 
filed against him in court. (Sec 1, 2, 3 Rule 102) 
2) He may apply for bail with any court in the 
province or city or municipality where he is 
held. (Section 17 of Rule 114) 
3) He may, if a complaint against him is 
commenced before the proper officer for 
inquest investigation, ask for a regular 
preliminary investigation and raise the issue of 
his illegal arrest. Ofcourse after signing the 
waiver (Section 7 of Rule 112) 
4) He may, if a complaint or information is filed 
against him in court for an offense requiring a 
preliminary investigation, asked for a 
preliminary investigation within five (5) days 
from the time he learns of the filing of the 
complaint, or information (Section 7 of Rule 
112) 
5) He may, before entering his plea, move to 
quash the complaint or information on the 
ground that the court has no jurisdiction over 
his person 
 
The person arrested has the right to question the 
illegality of his arrest, whether with the warrant or 
without warrant. However, any objection involving 
a warrant of arrest or the procedure by which the 
court acquires jurisdiction of the person of the 
accused, for example, in warrantless arrest; it must 
be made before he enters his plea. 
 
When the accused has already entered his plea and 
participates during the trial without previously 
invoking his objections, then he is deemed to have 
waived his right to question the illegality of his arrest. 
There is also an instance where a previously illegal 
warrantless arrest may be validated by the issuance 
of a warrant of arrest 
 
The filing of charges and the issuance of warrant of 
arrest against a person invalidly detained will cure the 
defect, that the detention or at least deny him the 
right to be released because of such defect. the 
accused may be arrested by virtue of that warrant of 
arrest and therefore, the issue of whether there was 
a valid warrantless arrest will become moot and 
academic. 
 
Effects of failure to file a timely objection to illegal 
warantless arrest 
1) only the right to assail their arrest is waived 
2) He does not waive the right to question the 
admissibility of the evidence seized by virtue of 

--- PAGE 62 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
62 
the illegal arrest. Thus, the fruit of the 
poisonous tree still applies. 
3) Legality of the arrest affects only the 
jurisdiction of the court over the person of 
the accused. The illegality of the arrest cannot 
in itself be the basis for acquittal as it will 
not negate the validity of the conviction of the 
accused. 
4) even if the warrantless arrest of an accused is 
later proven to be invalid, such fact is not 
sufficient to cause to set aside a valid judgment 
rendered upon sufficient complaint after trial 
free from error. 
 
Effect of admission to bail on objections to an 
illegal arrest 
1) Shall not bar the accused from challenging the 
validity of the arrest or the legality of the 
warrant issued, provided that he raises the 
objection before he enters his plea. 
2) the objection shall be resolved by the court as 
early as practicable, but not later than the start 
of the trial of the case. 
 
Privilege from arrest 
Under Section 11, Article VI of the 1987 constitution, 
a senator or a member of the House of Representatives 
shall, in all offenses punishable by not more than six 
years imprisonment, be privileged from arrest when 
the Congress is in session. 
 
Does not apply 
1) when not in session 
2) When the offense is punishable more than 
six years even if Congress is in session 
 
Other exempt 
Sovereigns and other Chiefs of State, ambassadors, 
ministers plenipotentiary, ministers resident in charge 
of the affairs are immune from the criminal jurisdiction 
of the country of their assignment and are therefore 
immune from arrest. 
 
ARREST IN RELATION TO A CHILD IN 
CONFLICT WITH THE LAW 
 
AM 02-1-18-SC or The Revised Rule on Children in 
Conflict With The Law 
Section 8. Procedure for Handling Children 
Exempted from Criminal Liability. - If it is 
determined at the initial contact that the child is 15 
years of age or below, the procedure provided in 
Section 20, Republic Act No. 9344 shall be observed 
as follows:  
A) The authority which will have an initial 
contact with the child, in consultation with 
the local social welfare and development 
officer, has the duty to immediately 
release the child to the custody of 
his/her parents or guardian, or in the 
absence thereof, the child’s nearest 
relative. 
 
2019 Supreme Court Revised Rule on Children in 
Conflict with the Law 
Section 8-A. Procedure for Handling A Child Exempted 
from Criminal Liability Who Commits Serious Crimes. – A 
child who is above 12 years of age to 15 years of 
age and who commits a serious crime should be 
deemed a neglected child under Presidential Decree 
No. 603, as amended, and shall be mandatorily 
placed in the Intensive Juvenile Intervention and 
Support Center (IJISC) of a Bahay Pag-asa. The 
procedure provided in Section 20-A, Republic Act 
No. 9344, as amended, shall be observed as follows:  
A) A petition for involuntary commitment and 
placement under the IJISC shall be filed by 
the local social welfare and development 
officer of the local government unit where 
the offense was committed, or by the 
Department of Social Welfare and 
Development social worker in the local 
social welfare and development officer's 
absence, within 24 hours from the time of 
the receipt of a report on the alleged 
commission of said child.  
B) The court, where the petition for involuntary 
commitment has been filed, shall decide on 
the petition within 72 hours from the time 
the said petition has been filed by the 
Department of Social Welfare and 
Development/ Local Social Welfare and 
Development Office.  
C) The court will determine the initial period of 
placement of the child within the IJISC 
which shall not be less than one year.  
D) The multi-disciplinary team of the I.TISC 
will submit to the court:  
1) A case study and progress report, to 
include a psychiatric evaluation report, 
and recommend the reintegration of the 
child to his/her family or the extension 
of the placement under IJISC; and  
2) A report to the court on the services 
extended to the parents and family of the 
child and the compliance of the parents 
in the intervention program.  
 
e) The court will decide whether the child 
has successfully completed the center-
based intervention program and is 
already prepared to be reintegrated with 
his/her family, or if there is a need for 
the continuation of the center-based 
rehabilitation of the child.  
f) The court will determine the next period 
of assessment or hearing on the 
commitment of the child. 
 
Section 8-B. Procedure for Handling a Child 
Exempted from Criminal Liability Who Repeats 
Commission of Offense. – A child who is above 12 
years of age up to 15 years of age and who 
commits an offense for the second time or 
oftener: Provided, that the child was previously 
subjected to a community-based intervention 

--- PAGE 63 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
63 
program, shall be deemed a neglected child under 
Presidential Decree No. 603, as amended, and shall:  
a) Undergo an intensive intervention program 
supervised by the local social welfare and 
development officer;  
b) If the best interest of the child requires that 
he/she be placed in a youth care facility or 
"Bahay Pag-asa, the child's parents or 
guardians shall execute a written 
authorization for voluntary commitment of 
the child;  
c) If the child has no parents or guardians or if 
they refuse or fail to execute a written 
authorization for voluntary commitment 
under Section 8-B(b), the proper petition for 
involuntary commitment shall be 
immediately filed by the Department of 
Social Welfare and Development or the 
Local Social Welfare and Development 
Office pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 
603, as amended. 
 
Section 9. Procedure for Children Not Exempted 
from Criminal Liability. – A child fifteen (15) years 
and one (1) day old or above but below eighteen (18) 
years of age at the time of the commission of the 
offense shall, at the sound discretion of the court 
and subject to its supervision, be released on 
recognizance to the care of the willing and 
responsible mother or father, or appropriate 
guardian or custodian, or, in their absence, the 
nearest relative. However, if the prosecution 
determines that the child acted with discernment, 
the child shall be proceeded against in accordance 
with Sections 24 to 27 or, in case of diversion, 
Sections 29 to 37 of this Rule. 
 
Section 24. Release of Children on Recognizance to 
the Parents, Guardian, Custodian or Nearest 
Relative. – The release of a child from custody 
during the pendency of the case involving an offense 
not punishable by death, reclusion perpetua or life 
imprisonment may be ordered by the court only 
after a hearing for that purpose, and upon favorable 
recommendation of the social worker assigned to 
the child with due notice to the public prosecutor, 
the Sanggunian where the accused resides, and the 
private complainant. The child shall be released to 
the custody of a willing and responsible mother or 
father, or appropriate guardian or custodian, or in 
their absence, the nearest relative, who shall be 
responsible for the child's good behavior and 
appearance in court whenever required.  
 
No child shall be ordered detained in jail pending 
trial or hearing of the child's case. (Incorporated 
from A.M. No. 02-1-18 Re: Rule on Juveniles in 
Conflict with the Law issued on June 26, 2018) 
 
Section 25. Commitment and transfer to a Bahay 
Pag-asa. – A child charged with an offense, unless 
released on bail or recognizance, may be transferred 
to a "Bahay Pag-asa" or rehabilitation center or other 
appropriate facility operated or accredited by the 
Department of Social Welfare and Development 
which shall ensure the implementation of 
appropriate intervention programs, as well as the 
safety and appearance of the child in court. In the 
absence of a "Bahay Pag-asa" established by the local 
government pursuant to Section 8 of the Family 
Courts Act, and Republic Act No. 9344, as amended, 
in the city or municipality where the child resides, or 
a local rehabilitation center recognized by the 
government in the province, city or municipality 
within the jurisdiction of the court, or the 
Department of Social Welfare and Development, or 
other appropriate local rehabilitation center, 
detention pending trial may be replaced by 
alternative measures such as close supervision, 
intensive care or replacement with a family or in an 
educational setting or home. Institutionalization or 
detention of a child pending trial should be used only 
as a last resort and for the shortest possible time. 
(Incorporated from A.M. No. 02-1-18 Re: Rule on 
Juveniles in Conflict with the Law issued on June 26, 
2018) 
 
SEARCH AND SEIZURE 
 
RULE 126 
Section 1. Search warrant defined. — A search warrant 
is an order in writing issued in the name of the 
People of the Philippines, signed by a judge and 
directed to a peace officer, commanding him to 
search for personal property described therein and 
bring it before the court.  
 
Section 2. Court where application for search 
warrant shall be filed. — An application for search 
warrant shall be filed with the following:  
a) Any court within whose territorial jurisdiction a 
crime was committed.  
b) For compelling reasons stated in the 
application, any court within the judicial region 
where the crime was committed if the place of the 
commission of the crime is known, or any court 
within the judicial region where the warrant shall be 
enforced.  
 
However, if the criminal action has already been 
filed, the application shall only be made in the court 
where the criminal action is pending.  
 
Section 3. Personal property to be seized. — A 
search warrant may be issued for the search and 
seizure of personal property:  
a) Subject of the offense;  
b) Stolen or embezzled and other proceeds, or fruits 
of the offense; or  
c) Used or intended to be used as the means of 
committing an offense.  
 
Section 4. Requisites for issuing search warrant. — 
A search warrant shall not issue except upon 
probable cause in connection with one specific 
offense to be determined personally by the judge 
after examination under oath or affirmation of the 
complainant and the witnesses he may produce, and 
particularly describing the place to be searched and 

--- PAGE 64 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
64 
the things to be seized which may be anywhere in 
the Philippines.  
 
Section 5. Examination of complainant; record. — 
The judge must, before issuing the warrant, 
personally examine in the form of searching 
questions and answers, in writing and under oath, 
the complainant and the witnesses he may produce 
on facts personally known to them and attach to the 
record their sworn statements, together with the 
affidavits submitted.  
 
Section 6. Issuance and form of search warrant. — 
If the judge is satisfied of the existence of facts upon 
which the application is based or that there is 
probable cause to believe that they exist, he shall 
issue the warrant, which must be substantially in the 
form prescribed by these Rules. 
 
Art III, 1987 Constitution 
SECTION 2. The right of the people to be secure in 
their persons, houses, papers, and effects against 
unreasonable searches and seizures of whatever 
nature and for any purpose shall be inviolable, and 
no search warrant or warrant of arrest shall issue 
except upon probable cause to be determined 
personally by the judge after examination under oath 
or affirmation of the complainant and the witnesses 
he may produce, and particularly describing the 
place to be searched and the persons or things to be 
seized 
 
Section 1. Search warrant defined. — A search warrant 
is an order in writing issued in the name of the 
People of the Philippines, signed by a judge and 
directed to a peace officer, commanding him to 
search for personal property described therein and 
bring it before the court.  
 
Nature of application for search warrant 
It is a special criminal process and is heard ex parte. A 
search warrant is not criminal action nor does it 
represent a commencement of a criminal prosecution 
even if it is entitled like a criminal action. It is not a 
proceeding against a person but it is solely for the 
discovery and to get possession of personal 
property. 
 
It is a special and peculiar remedy, drastic in nature, and 
made necessary because of public necessity. It 
resembles, in some respect, with what is commonly 
known as John Doe proceedings. 
 
John Doe proceedings - an independent investigatory 
tool to ascertain whether a crime has been committed, 
and if so, by whom. One aspect of a John Doe 
proceeding is to allow law enforcement officers, 
through a court order by a judge, to examine a witness 
and to collect other sources of evidence to determine 
whether there is criminal conduct which should be 
prosecuted. It is similar because you can actually file 
for a search warrant even before a criminal case is filed 
in court. What it seeks to find out is whether or not 
there is an evidence or there is cause to prosecute a 
certain person for a criminal offense. 
 
Rationale 
Much like in warrants of arrest, the general rule is that 
no search and seizure can be made without a valid 
warrant issued by a competent judicial authority. 
 
Arrest Search and seizure 
The rules on arrest are 
concerned with the 
seizure of person so he 
may be made to answer 
for the commission of an 
offense. It involves the 
taking of a person into 
custody 
A search is concerned 
with the seizure of 
personal properties 
subject of the offense, 
stolen, or embezzled 
property, fruits of the 
offense or those 
intended to be used to 
commit an offense. 
A probable cause to the 
arrests does not 
necessarily involve a 
probable cause to search, 
and vice versa. Probable 
cause to arrest involves a 
different determination 
from probable cause to 
search.  
 
In order to determine 
the probable cause to 
arrest, the judge not the 
prosecutor must have 
sufficient facts in his 
hands, that would tend 
to show that a crime has 
been committed and that 
a particular person 
committed it. 
Probable cause to search 
requires facts to show 
that particular things 
connected with a crime 
are found in a specific 
location 
An arrest with a warrant 
may be on any day and at 
any time of day or night. 
A search warrant is 
generally served in the 
daytime unless there is a 
direction in the warrant, 
that it may be served at 
any time at the day or 
night. 
The issuance of a 
warrant of arrest 
presupposes the 
existence of a pending 
criminal case that give 
rise to the warrant. 
A search warrant does 
not require the existence 
of a criminal case. It may 
be issued prior to the 
filing of the case. 
 
Section 2. Court where application for search warrant shall 
be filed. — An application for search warrant shall be 
filed with the following:  
a) Any court within whose territorial 
jurisdiction a crime was committed.  
b) For compelling reasons stated in the 
application, any court within the judicial 
region where the crime was committed if the 
place of the commission of the crime is 
known, or any court within the judicial 
region where the warrant shall be enforced.  
 

--- PAGE 65 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
65 
However, if the criminal action has already been 
filed, the application shall only be made in the court 
where the criminal action is pending. 
 
GR: application for search warrant shall be filed with 
any court within whose territorial jurisdiction a crime 
was committed (no need to state the compelling 
reasons) 
XPN: 
1) For compelling reasons stated in the 
application, any court within the judicial 
region where the crime was committed if 
the place of the commission of the crime is 
known 
2) For compelling reasons stated in the 
application, any court within the judicial 
region where the warrant shall be enforced. 
3) If the criminal action has already been filed, the 
application shall only be made in the court 
where the criminal action is pending. 
 
Inherent power to quash search warrant of the 
courts 
The issuance of a search warrant is part of a court’s 
exercise of its ancillary jurisdiction and not of its 
criminal jurisdiction. Because it has the power to issue 
search warrants it also has the inherent power to quash 
warrants already issued 
 
Administrative Matter No. 99-20-09-SC 
1) ALL APPLICATIONS OF SEARCH 
WARRANT involving heinous crimes, 
illegal gambling, dangerous drugs and 
illegal possession of firearms. 
2) For these specific crimes, heinous crimes, 
illegal gambling, dangerous drugs and illegal 
possession of firearms,  
 the executive judge and vice executive 
judges of the regional trial courts of 
Manila and Quezon City, filed by 
Philippine National Police, the 
National Bureau of Investigation, the 
Presidential Anti-Organized Crime 
Task Force (PAOC-TF) and the 
Reaction Against Crime Task Force 
(REACT-TF) with the Regional Trial 
Courts of Manila and Quezon City 
 
Sec. 3. Personal property to be seized. – A search 
warrant may be issued for the search and seizure of 
personal property:  
a) Subject of the offense; 
b) Stolen or embezzled and other proceeds, or 
fruits of the offense; or  
c) Used or intended to be used as the means of 
committing an offense. 
 
The seizure of items not specified in the warrants 
cannot be justified by the directive to seize and take 
possession of other properties relative to such 
violation which, in no way, can be characterized as a 
particular description of the things to be seized 
 
GR: Must be particularly described 
XPN:  
1) particular thing is found to be a contraband or 
articles, the possession of which without, more 
constitutes a crime, they will not be ordered 
returned but shall be confiscated in favor of the 
state or destroyed as the case may be. 
 
How long does the court has to have custody 
Art. 125. Delay in the delivery of detained persons to the 
proper judicial authorities. – The penalties provided in 
the next preceding article shall be imposed upon the 
public officer or employee who shall detain any 
person for some legal ground and shall fail to deliver 
such person to the proper judicial authorities within 
the period of: twelve (12) hours, for crimes or 
offenses punishable by light penalties, or their 
equivalent; eighteen (18) hours, for crimes or 
offenses punishable by correctional penalties, or 
their equivalent; and thirty-six (36) hours, for crimes 
or offenses punishable by afflictive or capital 
penalties, or their equivalent. 
 
Section 4. Requisites for issuing search warrant. — A 
search warrant shall not issue except upon probable 
cause in connection with one specific offense to be 
determined personally by the judge after 
examination under oath or affirmation of the 
complainant and the witnesses he may produce, and 
particularly describing the place to be searched and 
the things to be seized which may be anywhere in 
the Philippines. 
 
Requirements 
1) The warrant must be issued upon probable 
cause. 
 
Probable cause - is defined as such facts and 
circumstances which would lead a reasonably discreet 
and prudent man to believe that an offense has been 
committed and that the object sought in the 
connection with the offense are in the place sought to 
be searched. 
 
2) The probable cause must be determined by the 
judge himself and not by the applicant or any 
other person. 
 The required procedure for the 
determination of the judge is that the 
examination must be personally 
conducted by the judge. 
 The examination must be in the form 
of searching questions and answers. 
 The complainant and the witnesses 
shall be examined on those facts 
personally known to them 
 The statements must be in writing and 
under oath, and the sworn statements 
of the complainant and the witnesses, 
together with the affidavit submitted 
shall be attached to the record. 

--- PAGE 66 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
66 
3) In the determination of probable cause, the 
judge must examine, under oath or affirmation, 
the complainant and such witnesses as the 
latter may produce. 
 
Warrant of arrest Search warrant 
the judge will personally 
look at the documents, 
information, and 
supporting evidence, etc. 
the judge will require a 
personal examination of 
the complainant or the 
one that applied for a 
search warrant, and the 
witnesses which he may 
provide. 
 
4) The warrant issued must particularly 
describe the place to be searched and persons 
or things to be seized. 
 
The long-standing rule is that a description of the place 
to be searched is sufficient if the officer with the 
warrant can with reasonable effort ascertain and 
identify the place intended and distinguish it from 
other places in the community. Any designation or 
description that points out the place, to the 
exclusion of all others, and on inquiry leads the 
officers unerringly to it satisfies the constitutional 
requirement. 
 
5) The applicant and the witnesses must testify on 
the facts, data or information personally 
known to them. 
 
Nullification of search warrant 
1) The absence of any of these requisites will 
cause the downright nullification of the search 
warrant. 
2) The issuance of a search warrant for more 
than one offense would violate Section 4 of 
Rule 126, and is not allowed. 
3) Absent the element of personal knowledge 
by the applicant or his witnesses, of the facts 
upon which the issuance of a search warrant 
may be justified, the warrant is not deemed 
based on probable cause and is a nullity. Its 
issuance being in legal contemplation, arbitrary. 
 
Place must be particularly described 
The caption of the search warrant provides or 
indicates the address of petitioner as “Hernan 
Cortez Street, Cebu City," while the body of the 
search warrant states that that the address is 
“Hernan Cortez Street, Mandaue City”. 
 
The Supreme Court did not consider the 
discrepancy as sufficient to consider the warrant as 
constitutionally infirm. It was not shown that 
there was a street with the same name in Cebu 
City, nor was it established that the officers 
enforcing the warrant had difficulty locating the 
premises of the petitioner which was actually in 
Hernan Cortez Street, Mandaue City. 
 
The Supreme Court said that the description of the 
place to be searched is sufficient if the officer 
with the warrant can, with reasonable effort, 
ascertain and identify the place intended and 
distinguish it from other places in the 
community. Any designation or description known 
to the locality that points out to the place to the 
exclusion of all others and on inquiry leads the 
officers unerringly to it satisfies the constitutional 
requirement. (Uy v. BIR) 
 
Things must be particularly described 
A search warrant may be said to particularly describe 
the things to be seized when:  
1) the description therein is a specific as the 
circumstances will ordinarily allow;  
2) the description expresses a conclusion of fact 
not of law, by which the warrant officer may be 
guided in making the search and seizure;  
3) the things described are limited to those who 
bear a direct relation to the offense for which 
the warrant is being issued. 
 
The law does not require that the things to be seized, 
must be described in precise and minute detail as to 
leave no room for doubt on the part of the searching 
authorities. 
 
A search warrant is not sweeping authority 
empowering a raiding party to undertake a fishing 
expedition to seize and confiscate any and all kinds of 
evidence or articles relating to a crime. 
 
Contraband 
When it pertains to contrabands or those things which 
are illegal per se, there is less stringent requirements on 
the jurisprudence as to the particular description. 
 
When partly valid and partly void 
As to the part where it is too general or it admits of 
even those things which may not be in connection with 
the crime or which may be connected with a valid 
business therefore, the public officers or the officers 
enforcing the search warrant actually had to apply 
discretion. But as to the part where the things to be 
seized or actually seized is actually particularly 
described, the seizure of those things are valid. 
 
Ownership 
Ownership is of no consequence. It is sufficient that 
the person against whom the warrant is directed has 
control and possession of the properties sought to be 
seized. 
 
Section 5. Examination of complainant; record. — The 
judge must, before issuing the warrant, personally 
examine in the form of searching questions and 
answers, in writing and under oath, the complainant 
and the witnesses he may produce on facts 
personally known to them and attach to the record 
their sworn statements, together with the affidavits 
submitted. 

--- PAGE 67 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
67 
 
Section 6. Issuance and form of search warrant. — If the 
judge is satisfied of the existence of facts upon which 
the application is based or that there is probable 
cause to believe that they exist, he shall issue the 
warrant, which must be substantially in the form 
prescribed by these Rules. 
 
Form of search warrant 
1) It must be in the name of the People of the 
Philippines;  
2) It must be signed by the judge after finding 
probable cause;  
3) The finding of probable cause must be through 
the examination under oath or affirmation of 
the complainant and the witnesses that he may 
present, and must be personally made by the 
judge through probing searching questions 
4) Must particularly described the place to be 
searched, or the person to be searched, and the 
thing or things to be seized. 
5) It must command a peace officer or a law 
enforcement officer to search for personal 
property described therein and bring it before 
the court. 
 
Waiver 
failure to object during the trial of the case to the 
legality of the search warrant and to the admissibility of 
the evidence obtained thereby. 
 
Search warrant Warrant of arrest 
Objection must be 
during trial 
Objection must be 
before plea 
 
 It has been consistently ruled that an accused is 
estopped from assailing any irregularity of his arrest if 
he fails to raise this issue or to move for the quashal of 
the information against him on this ground before 
arraignment. Any objection involving a warrant of 
arrest or the procedure by which the court acquired 
jurisdiction over the person of the accused must be 
made before he enters his plea; otherwise, the 
objection is deemed waived. (Rebellion v. People) 
 
It bears stressing that the legality of the arrest affects 
only the jurisdiction of the court over their persons. 
Their warrantless arrests cannot, by themselves, be the 
bases of their acquittal. (People v. Yau) 
 
Section 7. Right to break door or window to effect search. 
— The officer, if refused admittance to the place of 
directed search after giving notice of his purpose 
and authority, may break open any outer or inner 
door or window of a house or any part of a house or 
anything therein to execute the warrant or liberate 
himself or any person lawfully aiding him when 
unlawfully detained therein. 
 
Principle of knock and announce  
They may only break open any outer or inner door or 
window of a house to execute the search warrant if 
after said notice and demand such officers are refused 
entry to the place of directed search. This is known as 
the knock and announced principle which is embodied 
in Anglo American law. The method of entry of an 
officer into a dwelling in the presence or absence of 
such notice are as important considerations in 
assessing whether subsequent entry to the search 
and/or arrest is constitutionally reasonable. 
 
In case in which the occupants of the house being 
searched refused to open the door despite the fact 
that the searching party knocked on the door several 
times and the agent saw the suspicious movements 
of the people inside the house, such circumstances 
will justify the searching party's forcible entry to the 
house founded as it is on the apprehension that the 
execution of their mission will be frustrated unless 
they do so. (People v. Salangit) 
 
Requisites 
1) that the officer gives notice of his purpose 
and authority;  
2) he is refused admittance to the place of 
directed search despite notice; and  
3) the purpose of breaking is to execute the 
warrant or to liberate himself or any person 
lawfully aiding him when unlawfully detain 
therein 
 
Section 8. Search of house room or premises to be made in 
presence of two witnesses. – No search of house, room or 
any other premises shall be made except in the 
presence of the lawful occupant thereof or any 
member of his family, or, in the absence of the 
latter, two witnesses of sufficient age and 
discretion, residing in the same locality. 
 
The purpose of the presence of these people is to see 
to it that there is no planting of evidence that the search 
is validly conducted to see to it that the lawful occupant 
or the family member, or the two witnesses, how the 
search is being conducted. 
 
Section 9. Time of making search. — The warrant must 
direct that it be served in the day time, unless the 
affidavit asserts that the property is on the person or 
in the place ordered to be searched, in which case a 
direction may be inserted that it be served at any 
time of the day or night. 
 
Execution 
GR: It be executed in the daytime 
XPN:  
1) If the property to be seized is in the person of 
the accused, then the search warrant may direct 
that it may be executed it at any time of the day 
or night when the person to execute it sees or 
has the opportunity to search the person 
described in the search warrant 
2) the place searched is ordered it can only be 
accessed at a certain time during the night. 
 

--- PAGE 68 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
68 
XPN of XPN: if not indicated in the search warrant, 
we must go back to the provision of the rules that it be 
served at the day time. If it is allowed that it be served 
during the nighttime then it must be specifically 
indicated or the direction that it be served at any time 
in the day or night must be indicated in the search 
warrant. 
 
Section 10. Validity of search warrant. — A search 
warrant shall be valid for ten (10) days from its date. 
Thereafter it shall be void. 
 
Search warrant Warrant of arrest 
Valid for 10 days, cannot 
be used every day for 10 
days for different 
purposes each day 
Valid as long as it is not 
recalled 
Can actually be 
extended, so long as the 
search conducted is not 
another search but 
merely a continuation 
of the search that has 
been begun during the 
effectivity of the search 
warrant. 
 
 
Section 11. Receipt for the property seized. — The officer 
seizing property under the warrant must give a 
detailed receipt for the same to the lawful occupant 
of the premises in whose presence the search and 
seizure were made, or in the absence of such 
occupant, must, in the presence of at least two 
witnesses of sufficient age and discretion residing in 
the same locality, leave a receipt in the place in 
which he found the seized property. 
 
After the search there will always be a receipt given to 
the lawful occupant, or to the member of his family, or 
to the 2 witnesses. Therefore, the searching team 
cannot use the same search warrant to search the 
premises again. They have to secure another search 
warrant. 
 
Section 12. Delivery of property and inventory thereof to 
court; return and proceedings thereon. —  
a) The officer must forthwith deliver the 
property seized to the judge who issued 
the warrant, together with a true inventory 
thereof duly verified under oath.  
b) Ten (10) days after issuance of the search 
warrant, the issuing judge shall ascertain if 
the return has been made, and if none, shall 
summon the person to whom the warrant 
was issued and require him to explain why 
no return was made. If the return has been 
made, the judge shall ascertain whether 
section 11 of this Rule has been complied 
with and shall require that the property 
seized be delivered to him. The judge shall 
see to it that subsection (a) hereof has been 
complied with.  
c) The return on the search warrant shall be 
filed and kept by the custodian of the log 
book on search warrants who shall enter 
therein the date of the return, the result, and 
other actions of the judge. 
 
A violation of this section shall constitute contempt 
of court. 
 
Delivery, inventory and return proceedings 
1) The officer must forthwith deliver the property 
seized to the judge who issued the warrant, 
together with a true inventory thereof duly 
verified under oath. 
2) The judge shall ascertain if the return has been 
made, he shall do so 10 days after the issuance 
of the search warrant. 
3) If no return has been made, the judge shall 
summon the person to whom the warrant 
was issued, and require him to explain why no 
return has been made. 
4) If the return has been made, the judge shall 
ascertain whether Section 11 of Rule 126 (the 
giving of the receipt of the property seized) was 
complied with, and shall require that the 
property seized be delivered to him. 
5) When the evidence shows that the judge who 
issued the search warrant did not require the 
officers executing the warrant to make an 
accurate and complete inventory of the things 
seized and submit the same to him, he is guilty 
of gross ignorance of the law. 
 
Section 13. Search incident to lawful arrest. — A person 
lawfully arrested may be searched for dangerous 
weapons or anything which may have been used or 
constitute proof in the commission of an offense 
without a search warrant. 
 
GR: A valid search may only be effected by obtaining 
a valid search warrant 
XPN:  
1) Warrantless search incidental to a valid or 
lawful arrest; 
2) Consented warrantless search; searches with 
the Express waiver of the person being search 
3) Custom search; 
 It may be of vessels or aircrafts or 
public utilities like buses, jeepneys, etc 
in relation to immigration law, fishery 
law, laws on airports, seaport security, 
jail safety 
4) Plain view doctrine 
5) Stop and frisk (Terry Search) 
6) Search of a moving vehicle 
7) Exigent and emergency circumstances  
8) Inspection of buildings and other premises to 
enforce building laws, fire laws, safety 
standards laws.  
9) Canine dog sniff test and thermal imaging. 
 
In relation to sec. 2 of Art. III of the Constitution, if 
the elements or requirements that are provided for 
under the Constitution or the law or jurisprudence is 

--- PAGE 69 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
69 
met, then the search even without a warrant will not be 
considered unreasonable. 
 
Section 13. Search incident to lawful arrest. — A person 
lawfully arrested may be searched for dangerous 
weapons or anything which may have been used or 
constitute proof in the commission of an offense 
without a search warrant. 
 
Search incident to lawful arrest 
The purpose of the rule is to protect the arresting 
officer against physical harm from the person being 
arrested, who might be armed with a concealed 
weapon, and also to prevent the person arrested from 
destroying the evidence within his reach. 
 
Requisites 
1) There must be a by valid arrest; and  
2) The search must be limited to space and time. 
 It is limited as to time when it is made 
at the earliest possible opportunity 
after the arrest and there must be no 
considerable lapse of time. 
 It is also limited as to space it is made 
on the person arrested or the 
immediate vicinity where he has 
effective control, 1) to cart away 
evidence or  
2)to get weapon 
 
Effect of noncompliance 
1. If there is no valid arrest, then whatever is 
searched incident to that arrest would be 
fruits of the poisonous tree.  
2. If there is a violation to the requirement that 
the search must be limited to space and 
time, all things searched which may violate the 
limitation as to time or space will be 
considered as fruits of the poisonous tree. 
 
Consented search 
It is when the right against warrantless searches has 
been voluntarily waived. It occurs when a person gives 
a law enforcement agent permission to search in areas 
where such person has reasonable expectation of 
privacy. 
 Jurisprudence requires that in instances of 
consented searches, it is fundamental that, to 
constitute a waiver: the right to waive exists.  
 The person involved has knowledge of the 
existence of such right. 
 The said person had an actual intention to 
relinquish such right 
 
The implied agreement to a search, if there was any, 
could not have been more than mere passive 
conformity given under intimidating or coercive 
circumstances, and is thus considered no consent 
at all within the purview of the constitutional 
guarantee. 
 
Customs search 
It could be in a wharf, in a port, i.e. airport or seaport. 
It could be in vessels or aircrafts so long as it is 
pursuant to the tariff and customs codes. 
 
What is common in the implementation of these laws 
is that the police or enforcement officer has the initial 
right to ask any person who may be carrying things, 
which they reasonably believe would be under or 
covered by these respective laws to ask for the 
authority to transport it or the authority to have it in 
their possession. 
 
In the absence of any papers, then they will have 
already reasonable justification and or probable cause 
to conduct a further search or inspection 
 
Routine checks 
1) Routine checks in airports  
2) Routine checks in seaports  
3) Public transport terminals  
4) Jail safety 
 
In these public areas, there is a diminished expectation 
of privacy; because inspections are conducted in these 
public areas for the safety of the general public. The 
Supreme Court has continuously upheld that the 
limited intrusion into the person and the things that 
they may bring into these public spaces is a valid 
warrantless search. 
 
Related laws 
1) Airports - Republic Act 6235 
2) Seaport - Executive Order Number 513 
 
Plain view doctrine 
The doctrine states that the objects within the sight of 
an officer who has a right to be in a position to have 
the view, are subject to seizure and may be presented 
as evidence. 
 
Elements 
1) A prior valid intrusion based on the valid 
warrantless arrest in which the police are legally 
present in the pursuit of their official duties 
2) The evidence was inadvertently discovered 
by the police who have the right to be where 
they are. 
3) The evidence must be immediately apparent 
4) Plain view justified where seizure of evidence 
without further search 
 
Stop and frisk/ Terry search 
Two purposes 
1. The general interests of effective crime 
prevention and detection; and  
2. The safety of the police officer to take steps 
to assure himself that the person with whom 
he deals is not armed with a deadly weapon that 
could be used against him. 
 
Two parts 

--- PAGE 70 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
70 
1) Stop - a valid stop by an officer requires that he 
has a reasonable and articulable belief that a 
criminal activity has happened or is about to 
happen. This is based on the experience of the 
law enforcement officer 
2) Frisk - the frisk must be merely a pat down 
outside the person's outer garment, and not 
unreasonably intrusive. 
 
Extensive search 
If upon you frisking on the outside garment, there is 
reasonable belief that there is a concealed weapon, then  
that will allow or authorize the law enforcement officer 
to do a more extensive search of the body of the 
person. 
 
Search of moving vehicle 
To do a valid stop of the moving vehicle, there must 
be an initial determination of probable cause which in 
this instance means or signifies a reasonable ground of 
suspicion, supported by circumstances, which are 
sufficiently strong in themselves to warrant a cautious 
man's belief that an offense has been committed, and 
that the items articles or objects sought in connection 
with said offense are subject to seizure and destruction 
by law is in the place to be searched. 
 
Normally permissible searches of moving vehicle 
1) where the officer merely draws aside the 
curtain of a vacant vehicle which is parked on 
the public fairgrounds;  
2) simply looks into a vehicle - flashes a light 
therein without opening the cars door;  
3) where the occupants are not subjected to a 
physical or body search;  
4) where the inspection of the vehicle is limited to 
a visual search or visual inspection; and  
5) where the routine check is conducted in a fixed 
area. 
 
Extensive search 
If after conducting the visual search, there is cause to 
do a more extensive search, then that would be 
allowed. 
 
Requirements for a valid checkpoint 
1) the location of checkpoints must be fixed; 
2) the location of checkpoints must be 
determined by responsible officers; 
3) checkpoints must be manned by at least one 
officer for command responsibility purposes;  
4) the search in the checkpoint must be limited 
to visual search; and 
5) one must not be detained longer than what 
is necessary for a visual search. 
 
Aerial target zoning 
Search of a particular area. If there is no priorly 
obtained search warrant, then that would be invalid - 
that would be an unreasonable search. 
 
Exigent and emergency circumstances 
This exception applies during extraordinary times 
wherein warrantless searches are allowed, such as coup 
d’état and rebellions, where the courts are not open. 
This could also apply during times of unrest or when 
there is general political instability. Where because of 
the exigencies of what is happening in the country, a 
valid warrantless search may be conducted to aid in the 
administration of justice. 
 
Inspection of buildings and other premises to enforce 
building laws, fire laws, safety standards laws 
In the Building Code of the Philippines, building 
officials has authority to inspect compliance with the 
Building Code as to the structure, the materials that 
were used, compliance with a minimum requirement as 
to height, etc. For the purpose of this inspection, there 
is no need to secure a prior judicial search warrant. 
 
In the inspection of the Bureau of Fire officials for 
compliance with the Fire Code - whether there is 
enough fire exits, enough fire extinguishers, or other 
safety protocols that are required under the Fire Code 
- no need for prior search warrant for the inspection. 
 
This also applies to our Sanitation Code of the 
Philippines - to ensure that there is compliance with 
this, the officers in charge with implementing the 
Sanitation Code does not need any prior search warrant 
for the conduct of inspection to see to it that there is 
compliance with the Code. 
 
Canine/dog sniff test and thermal imaging  
Canine dog sniff 
1) When the canine or dog sniff test is conducted 
in an airport or a seaport or in a public area, 
then it may be considered as valid using the 
same justification as when we enter into an 
airport or a seaport. There is diminish 
expectation of privacy. 
2) When the canine or sniff test is used in a house 
or a private property, where there is no 
expectation of diminished privacy, the 
requirement would be, before that test is 
conducted, is authority for test to be 
conducted. Otherwise, it will be considered as 
an unreasonable search. 
 
Thermal imaging 
1. If the situation of the use of the thermal 
imaging device is in places like airports, 
seaports, or in public spaces, since there is 
already a diminished expectation of 
privacy, it is then a valid intrusion into 
privacy. 
2. When thermal imaging devices are used to 
conduct surveillance or to investigate a private 
household, then again that would be a totally 
different matter and authority to conduct such 
investigation or a search warrant must be 
obtained first - specifically authorizing the use 

--- PAGE 71 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
71 
of thermal imaging. Otherwise, it will be 
considered as an unreasonable search. 
 
Doctrine of the fruit of the poisonous tree 
Section 3(2), Article III of the 1987 Constitution An 
exclusionary rule which instructs that the evidence 
obtained and confiscated on the occasion of such 
unreasonable searches and seizures are deemed 
tainted and should be excluded for being the 
proverbial fruit of a poisonous tree. 
 
Any evidence obtained in violation of such 
constitutional provision shall be inadmissible for any 
purpose in any proceeding. The evidence obtained 
through an unlawful search would be inadmissible as 
evidence against the accused, and this applies to both 
instances of illegally obtained search warrant or invalid 
warrantless search. 
 
Effect of waiver of the illegal warrantless arrest 
The inadmissibility of the fruit of the poisonous tree is 
not waived, even if objecting to the validity of the 
warrant of arrest or search warrant is already 
deemed waived, because it was not a questioned 
before the entry of the plea.  
 
Civil damages and criminal liability 
Rule 126 of the Rules on Criminal Procedure No 
counter – claim, cross – claim or third – party 
complaint may be filed by the accused in the criminal 
case, but any cause of action which could have been 
the subject thereof maybe litigated in a separate civil 
action. 
 
1) The proceedings under Rule 126 of the Rules 
on the Revised Rules on Criminal Procedure 
do not provide for the filing of the counter 
claims for damages against those who may 
have improperly sought the issuance of the 
search warrant. 
2) the aggrieved party have the right to seek 
damages if the circumstances warrants by filing 
a separate civil action for the wrongs inflicted 
on them by an improperly obtained or 
enforced search warrant. There is civil liability 
on the basis of the concept of an independent 
civil action for violation of a person’s right to 
be secure in his person, house, papers, and 
effects against unreasonable searches and 
seizures under Article 32 (9) of the New Civil 
Code. 
3) This liability shall be separate and distinct from 
any criminal liability that may arise from the 
Revised Penal Code, such as violation of 
domicile under Article 128 of the RPC, search 
warrant maliciously obtained, and abuse in the 
service of those legally obtained under Article 
129 of the RPC, or possibly searching domicile 
without witnesses under Article 130 of the 
RPC. 
 
Relating to the Constitutional right 
1) The provision of Section 2, Article III of the 
Constitution is leveled against the State or law 
enforcement officers of the State and it is not 
against private persons. 
2) Where there is no participation of the 
government cannot be considered as 
unreasonable searches and seizure in relation to 
Section 2, Article 3 of the Constitution (a 
private person can validly arrest a person 
committing a crime, or has just committed a 
crime, or is attempting to commit a crime (in 
flagrante delicto arrest) under Section 5 of Rule 
113 of the Revised Rules on Criminal 
Procedure) 
 
Section 14. Motion to quash a search warrant or to 
suppress evidence; where to file. — A motion to quash a 
search warrant and/or to suppress evidence 
obtained thereby may be filed in and acted upon 
only by the court where the action has been 
instituted. If no criminal action has been 
instituted, the motion may be filed in and 
resolved by the court that issued the search 
warrant. However, if such court failed to resolve the 
motion and a criminal case is subsequent filed in 
another court, the motion shall be resolved by the 
latter court. 
 
1) If there is still no criminal complaint or 
information filed in court and then you filed an 
application for a search warrant and then a 
search warrant is subsequently issued, the 
motion may be filed in and resolved by the 
court that issued the search warrant. 
2) A motion to quash a search warrant and/or to 
suppress evidence obtained thereby may be 
filed in and acted upon only by the court 
where the action has been instituted 
3) If such court failed to resolve the motion and 
a criminal case is subsequent filed in another 
court, the motion shall be resolved by the 
latter court 
 
Who may assail the issuance of a search warrant? 
Well settled is the rule that the legality of seizure can 
be contested only by the party whose right has been 
impaired thereby and the objection to an unlawful 
search and seizure is purely personal and cannot be 
availed of by any third party. 
 
If the proper party in interest, the person who is 
actually prejudiced by the illegal search, wants to file 
for a motion to quash, or motion to suppress evidence, 
there is no need for the public prosecutor’s conformity 
with that motion. 
 
The question of whether there was abuse in the 
enforcement of the challenged search warrant is not 
within the scope of the motion to quash or the motion 
to suppress evidence. Otherwise stated, the manner of 
serving the warrant and effecting the search are 
not an issue to be resolved in a motion to quash. 

--- PAGE 72 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
72 
The remedies against such abuse are penal, civil, or 
administrative. 
 
Remedies 
1) The motion to quash the search warrant; - 
whether or not there is a case filed in court 
2) The motion to suppress evidence obtained by 
virtue of the invalid warrant; - when there is no 
case filed in court, before the accused enter his 
plea 
3) Objection to the admissibility of the evidence 
obtained by virtue of an invalid warrant when 
such evidence is offered in evidence - when the 
trial is already ongoing when the party has 
already presented the things seized under an 
illegal search warrant 
 
A search warrant as an incident of a criminal case filed 
Where the criminal case of which the search warrant is 
an incident has already been filed before the trial court 
for the purpose of determining the proper remedy 
from a grant or denial of a motion to quash a search 
warrant, where the search warrant is issued as an 
incident in a pending criminal case, the quashal of a 
search warrant is merely interlocutory. There is still 
something more to be done in the said criminal case 
and the determination of the guilt of the accused 
therein is yet to be determined. 
 
Since you have no other remedy but to wait for the 
entire case to be finished before you can question 
whether the grant or the denial of the search warrant is 
valid or not, then you can raise it up to a higher court, 
to the Court of Appeals via petition for certiorari 
under Rule 65 on the grounds of grave abuse of 
discretion. 
 
A search warrant in anticipation of a criminal case 
The denial or the grant of the search warrant actually 
disposes of the case. 
 
RIGHT TO BAIL 
Article III, 1987 Constitution 
SECTION 13. All persons, except those charged 
with offenses punishable by reclusion perpetua when 
evidence of guilt is strong, shall, before conviction, 
be bailable by sufficient sureties, or be released on 
recognizance as may be provided by law. The right 
to bail shall not be impaired even when the privilege 
of the writ of habeas corpus is suspended. Excessive 
bail shall not be required. 
 
Bail  
 A security given for the release of a person in 
custody of the law, furnished by him or a bondsman, 
to guarantee his appearance before any court as 
required under the conditions hereinafter specified. 
(Sec 1, Rule 114) 
Section 1. Bail defined. — Bail is a security given for 
the release of the person in custody of the law, 
furnished by him or a bondsman to guarantee his 
appearance before any court as required under the 
conditions herein after specified. Bail may be given 
in the form of corporate surety property, bond, cash 
deposit, or recognizance. 
 
Characteristics 
1) Bail is a security - the purpose of the giving of 
bail is to guarantee the appearance of the 
accused at the trial. 
2) Bail is furnished by the person to be released 
or bondsman 
3) The security is given to guarantee the 
appearance of the person released before any 
court as required under the conditions 
specified under Rule 114. 
 
Elements 
1) The right is a constitutional right 
 
Constitution lays down the following fundamental 
tenets on bail;  
 All persons charged before their conviction for 
a criminal offense shall be entitled to bail. This 
is the general rule.  
 The suspension of the privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus does not impair the right to bail. 
 Excessive bail is not required. 
 
Purpose of bail 
1) To relieve an accused from imprisonment until 
his conviction and yet assure appearance at the 
trial and at the same time enable him to prepare 
his defense without being subject to 
punishment prior to conviction. 
2) To prevent the release of an accused who 
might otherwise be dangerous to society or 
whom judges might not want to be released. 
3) It acts as reconciling mechanism to 
accommodate both the accused’s interest in 
liberty before trial and society's interest in 
assuring accused presence at the trial. 
4) The right to bail is granted because in all 
criminal prosecutions the accused is presumed 
innocent, that without bail bond the accused 
under detention cannot be released. 
 
General rules on bail 
1. All persons charged before their conviction 
for a criminal offense shall be entitled to bail. 
2. The suspension of the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus does not impair the right 
to bail. 
3. Excessive bail is not required. 
4. The right can be invoked or is available the 
moment there is an arrest, with or without a 
warrant 
5. The person to be released must be in custody 
of the law. 
6. Before or after information is filed 
7. The hearing must be necessary and summary 
 
Narciso v. Sta Romana Cruz 

--- PAGE 73 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
73 
The following are the duties of the trial judge in a 
petition for bail in the offenses as mentioned:  
a) Notify the prosecutor of the hearing of the 
application for bail or require him to submit his 
recommendation (Section 18, Rule 114 of the Rules of 
Court as amended; 
b) Conduct a hearing of the application for bail 
regardless of whether or not the prosecution refuses to 
present evidence to show that the guilt of the accused 
is strong for the purpose of enabling the court to 
exercise its sound discretion (Sections 7 and 8, supra); 
c) Decide whether the evidence of guilt of the 
accused is strong based on the summary of evidence 
of the prosecution (Baylon v. Sison, supra); 
d) If the guilt of the accused is not strong, discharge 
the accused upon the approval of the bail bond. 
(Section 19, supra). Otherwise, petition should be 
denied. 
 
Forms of bail (Sec 1, Rule 114) 
The form of bail is the choice of the accused 
1) Corporate surety – Bonding company 
guarantees the appearance in court of the 
accused. The accused only has to pay a 
premium and the bond is renewed annually. 
 
General requirements 
 The accused or someone acting on his 
behalf can obtain this surety from any 
domestic or foreign corporation which 
is licensed in the Philippines to provide 
a surety. 
 Bail bond must also be subscribed by 
the accused and an officer of the 
corporate surety (solidarily liable) 
 There are 3 parties in a corporate 
surety 
1) state,  
2) accused 
3) corporate surety 
 
Section 10. Corporate surety. — Any 
domestic or foreign corporation, licensed 
as a surety in accordance with law and 
currently authorized to act as such, may 
provide bail by a bond subscribed jointly by 
the accused and an officer of the corporation 
duly authorized by its board of directors. 
(10a) 
 
2) Property bond - If the accused has no cash 
and no surety, title of a real property is 
deposited in court; and it does not need to be 
in the name of the accused. 
 There are 3 parties in a property surety 
1) state,  
2) accused 
3) owner of the property 
 
Section 11. Property bond, how posted. — A 
property bond is an undertaking constituted 
as lien on the real property given as 
security for the amount of the bail. Within 
ten (10) days after the approval of the bond, 
the accused shall cause the annotation of 
the lien on the certificate of title on file with 
the Register of Deeds if the land is 
registered, or if unregistered, in the 
Registration Book on the space provided 
therefor, in the Registry of Deeds for the 
province or city where the land lies, and on 
the corresponding tax declaration in the 
office of the provincial, city and municipal 
assessor concerned. 
 
Within the same period, the accused shall 
submit to the court his compliance and his 
failure to do so shall be sufficient cause 
for the cancellation of the property bond 
and his re-arrest and detention. (11a) 
 
Section 12. Qualifications of sureties in property 
bond. — The qualification of sureties in a 
property bond shall be as follows: 
 
(a) Each must be a resident owner of real 
estate within the Philippines; 
(b) Where there is only one surety, his real 
estate must be worth at least the amount 
of the undertaking; 
(c) If there are two or more sureties, each 
may justify in an amount less than that 
expressed in the undertaking but the 
aggregate of the justified sums must be 
equivalent to the whole amount of bail 
demanded. 
 
In all cases, every surety must be worth the 
amount specified in his own undertaking 
over and above all just debts, obligations and 
properties exempt from execution. (12a) 
 
Section 13. Justification of sureties. — Every 
surety shall justify by affidavit taken before 
the judge that he possesses the 
qualifications prescribed in the preceding 
section. He shall describe the property given 
as security, stating the nature of his title, its 
encumbrances, the number and amount of 
other bails entered into by him and still 
undischarged, and his other liabilities. The 
court may examine the sureties upon oath 
concerning their sufficiency in such manner 
as it may deem proper. No bail shall be 
approved unless the surety is qualified. (13a) 
 
Art. 316. Other forms of swindling. — The 
penalty of arresto mayor in its minimum and 
medium period and a fine of not less than 
the value of the damage caused and not 
more than three times such value, shall be 
imposed upon:  
 
xxx 6. Any person who, while being a surety 
in a bond given in a criminal or civil action, 
without express authority from the court or 
before the cancellation of his bond or before 
being relieved from the obligation 

--- PAGE 74 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
74 
contracted by him, shall sell, mortgage, or, in 
any other manner, encumber the real 
property or properties with which he 
guaranteed the fulfillment of such 
obligation. 
 
4) Cash deposit - The two parties to the 
transaction are the State and the accused. 
Unlike other bail bonds, the money may then 
be used in the payment of that in which the 
State is concerned, such as fines and costs, such 
that when the accused violates the conditions 
of the bail bond it may be forfeited in favor of 
the State. 
 
Section 14. Deposit of cash as bail. — The 
accused or any person acting in his behalf 
may deposit in cash with the nearest 
collector or internal revenue or 
provincial, city, or municipal treasurer 
the amount of bail fixed by the court, or 
recommended by the prosecutor who 
investigated or filed the case. Upon 
submission of a proper certificate of 
deposit and a written undertaking 
showing compliance with the 
requirements of section 2 of this Rule, the 
accused shall be discharged from custody. 
The money deposited shall be considered 
as bail and applied to the payment of fine 
and costs while the excess, if any, shall be 
returned to the accused or to whoever 
made the deposit. (14a) 
 
Section 2. Conditions of the bail; requirements. — All 
kinds of bail are subject to the following conditions:  
a) The undertaking shall be effective upon 
approval, and unless cancelled, shall 
remain in force at all stages of the case until 
promulgation of the judgment of the 
Regional Trial Court, irrespective of whether 
the case was originally filed in or appealed to 
it;  
b) The accused shall appear before the 
proper court whenever required by the 
court or these Rules;  
c) The failure of the accused to appear at 
the trial without justification and despite 
due notice shall be deemed a waiver of 
his right to be present thereat. In such a 
case, the trial may proceed in absentia; 
and  
d) The bondsman shall surrender the 
accused to the court for execution of the 
final judgment. 
 
The original papers shall state the full name and 
address of the accused, the amount of the 
undertaking and the conditions herein required. 
Photographs (passport size) taken within the last six 
(6) months showing the face, left and right profiles 
of the accused must be attached to the bail 
 
Sec 2a 
Under Section 2: The (bail) shall be effective upon 
approval, and remain in force at all stages of the case, 
unless sooner cancelled until promulgation of the 
judgment of the Regional Trial Court, irrespective of 
whether the case was originally filed in or appealed to 
it 
 
1) The case was originally filed with the first level 
court – Municipal Trial Court, Municipal 
Circuit Trial Court, Metropolitan Trial Court, 
etc. but brought on appeal to the Regional Trial 
Court. In which case, the bill remains effective 
even during the pendency of the appeal with 
the latter court until the promulgation of its 
judgment. 
2) The case is originally filed with the Regional 
Trial Court, in which case the bill remains 
effective until the promulgation of judgment in 
the RTC. 
 
Sec 2b 
What are the instances under the rules wherein the 
presence of the accused is required? 
1) At the arraignment and plea, whether of 
innocence or of guilt; 
2) During trial whenever necessary for 
identification of the accused; and 
XPN: days of trial not for the identification of 
the accused 
3) Promulgation of the sentence 
XPN: unless it is for a light offense, in which 
case the accused may appear by counsel or 
representative. 
 
Sec 2c 
GR: the purpose of that particular trial or hearing is for 
the identification of the accused, he must be present 
XPN: unless the defense already stipulated as to the 
identity of the accused 
 
Sec 2d 
In relation to the duty of the bondsman to make sure 
that the accused is present when the court directs the 
accused to be present, in the situation that his sentence 
will be promulgated because, again, that is one instance 
that the presence of the accused is required, the 
bondsman is also empowered and duty bound to 
surrender the accused to the court for the execution for 
the promulgation and then the execution of the final 
judgment. 
 
Sec 2 par 2 
Form of the application for bails 
1) The original papers shall state the full name and 
address of the accused,  
2) the amount of the undertaking and the 
conditions herein required.  
3) Photographs (passport size) taken within the 
last six (6) months showing the face, left and 
right profiles of the accused must be attached 
to the bail. 

--- PAGE 75 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
75 
 
Section 23. Arrest of accused out on bail. — For the 
purpose of surrendering the accused, the bondsmen 
may arrest him or, upon written authority endorsed 
on a certified copy of the undertaking, cause him to 
be arrested by a police officer or any other person of 
suitable age and discretion. 
 
An accused released on bail may be re-arrested 
without the necessity of a warrant if he attempts to 
depart from the Philippines without permission of 
the court where the case is pending. 
 
Constitutional restrictions 
Right to travel 
The constitutional right to travel of a person accused 
of a crime and is undergoing criminal prosecution is 
limited by the bail that he is on. 
 
If the accused wants to travel abroad, he must ask leave 
of court or permission from the court for that travel. 
There must be a justification for the necessity of the 
travel abroad. 
 
Right to liberty of abode 
When the accused chooses to transfer his residency, he 
is duty bound to inform the court of the same. In that 
sense, the right of the accused to liberty of abode is also 
limited. 
 
Person to be released must be in custody of the law 
Custody of the law may be attained when:  
a) An accused is validly arrested;  
b) He submits to the jurisdiction of the court 
upon his appearance before the court;  
c) There is constructive custody when there are 
reasons that he cannot appear before the court 
to apply for bail, but he still accedes to the 
court’s jurisdiction and that his custody is 
already considered custody in law. 
 
The right to bail then may only be availed of by a 
person in the custody of the law or otherwise deprived 
of his liberty. Since bail is obtained for the provisional 
liberty of the accused, the same cannot be authorized 
or posted before custody of the accused has been 
acquired by judicial authority either by his arrest, with 
or without warrant, or his voluntary surrender. 
 
The concept of custody under the law does not merely 
signify restraint over the person or custody over the 
body of the accused. It is not limited to detention. It 
may also be present when the accused knows that his 
liberty is already limited and that he submits to the 
limitation on his liberty. 
 
The rationale for this rule is to discourage the practice 
where the accused could just send another on his 
behalf to post his bail without recognizing the 
jurisdiction of the court. 
 
A waiver of defense of lack of jurisdiction 
The mere application for bail constitutes a waiver of 
the defense of lack of jurisdiction over the person 
of the accused. This is because upon application for 
bail, affirmative relief is sought, thus, one is 
considered to have voluntarily appeared before the 
court 
 
Constructive custody 
One important concept that we reiterate when we talk 
about custody of the law is- if the person of the accused 
is in the hospital, but only instances where there is 
impossibility for the person in the hospital to come to 
the court to ask for or apply for bail, but he submits to 
the jurisdiction of the court - that is considered 
constructive custody under the law. Therefore, the 
accused can already apply for bail. 
 
Application of bail 
The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure on Bail 
pertains to criminal actions because it is under the 
Rules of Court. The Constitution, as interpreted in 
many cases, does not only pertain to criminal 
prosecutions. All persons except those charged with 
offenses punishable by Reclusion Perpetua when 
evidence of guilt is strong shall be, for conviction, be 
bailable by sufficient sureties or be released on 
recognizance as may be provided for by law. The right 
to bail shall not be impaired even when the privilege of 
the writ of habeas corpus is suspended and excessive 
bail shall not be required. 
 
The Constitution is silent as to whether or not it only 
applies to criminal prosecution. The interpretation of 
the Supreme Court, however, is that it may apply to 
other situations when there is a deprivation of liberty 
or when a person is under the custody of the law but 
not necessarily in the context of criminal proceedings. 
 
EXCEPTIONS TO RIGHT TO BAIL 
The right to bail in relation to military men who 
are charged for offenses and the right to bail in 
relation to extradition cases 
As to the military, the right to bail has traditionally not 
been recognized and is not available as an exception to 
the provision of the Constitution on the right to bail. 
The right to a speedy trial is given more emphasis in a 
military setting but the right to bail does not exist. The 
unique structure of the military should be enough 
reason to exempt military men from the constitutional 
coverage of the right to bail. 
 
The argument that denial for the military of the right 
to bail would violate the equal protection clause is not 
acceptable because military personnel are a class of 
their own, they are not the same as civilians. 
 
They are governed by a different code of conduct, 
organization and set of rules and when they are 
prosecuted, based on the articles of war and based on 
the rules under the military, the right to bail is not 
available to them because usually the violations are 

--- PAGE 76 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
76 
considered violations against the commander in 
chief and violations of this nature go very much into 
the stability of the military hierarchy. 
 
GR: the right to bail in the military is only not given 
for military offenses in Military Court Martials 
XPN: when the military is involved in a criminal 
action, which is filed in the prosecutor's office and then 
filed in the regular courts, then in that instance, they 
are allowed to avail of their constitutional right to bail. 
 
Extradition proceedings 
This is when a person, whether or not he is a citizen of 
the Philippines, has a criminal case or a case in a 
jurisdiction that is not the Philippines and where the 
Philippines and that particular foreign nation have an 
extradition treaty and because of the treaty, the 
Philippines as a party to the treaty is mandated to take 
custody of the person to be extradited. 
 
The Government of the United States of 
America v. Purganan 
Extradition proceedings 
The Supreme Court held that the constitutional 
provision on bail does not apply to extradition 
proceedings. It is available only in criminal 
proceedings. 
 
In extradition proceedings, prospective extraditees 
are generally not entitled to notice and hearing 
before warrants for their arrest can be issued. 
Neither are they entitled to the right to bail and 
provisional liberty while the extradition 
proceedings are pending.  
 
The policy is that a prospective extraditee is arrested 
and detained, to avoid his flight from justice. On the 
extraditee lies the burden of showing that he will not 
flee once bail is granted. 
 
The extradition court is that called upon to ascertain 
the guilt or the innocence of the person sought to be 
extradited. The ultimate purpose of extradition 
proceedings in court is only to determine whether 
the extradition request complies with the 
extradition treaty applicable, and whether the 
person sought is extraditable. 
 
Exception 
Accordingly and to best serve the ends of justice, we 
believe and so hold that, after a potential  extraditee 
has been arrested or placed under the custody of the 
law, bail may be applied for and granted as an 
exception, only upon a clear and convincing 
evidence showing  
1) that, once granted bail, the applicant will 
not be a flight risk or a danger to the 
community; and  
2) that there exist special, humanitarian 
and compelling circumstances  
including, as a matter of reciprocity, 
those cited by the highest court in the 
requesting state when it grants provisional 
liberty in extradition cases therein. 
 
xxx First, we note that the exercise of the State’s 
power to deprive an individual of his liberty is not 
necessarily limited to criminal proceedings. 
Respondents in administrative proceedings, 
such as deportation and quarantine, have 
likewise been detained. Second, to limit bail to 
criminal proceedings would be to close our eyes 
to our jurisprudential history. 
 
Government of Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region v. Olalia Jr. 
In a subsequent ruling in the case of Government of 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region vs. Olalia Jr. 
somehow abandoned the ruling in the case of 
Purganan. The Supreme Court ruled that following 
the trends in international law;  
1) The growing importance of the 
individual person in public international 
law, who, in the 20th century has gradually 
attained global recognition. 
2) The higher value now being given to 
human rights in the international sphere. 
3) The corresponding duty of the countries to 
observe this universal human rights in 
fulfilling their treaty obligation. And; 
4) The duty of the Supreme Court to balance 
the rights of the individual under our 
fundamental law on one hand, in the law 
on extradition on the other. 
 
Extradition proceeding being sui generis 
The standard of proof required in granting or 
denying bail can neither be the proof beyond 
reasonable doubt in criminal cases nor the 
standard of proof of preponderance of evidence 
in civil cases. While administrative in character, the 
standard of substantial evidence used in 
administrative cases cannot likewise apply given 
the object of extradition law which is to prevent the 
prospective extraditee from fleeing our jurisdiction. 
In his Separate Opinion in Purganan, then Associate 
Justice, now Chief Justice Reynato S. Puno, 
proposed that a new standard which he termed 
"clear and convincing evidence" should be used 
in granting bail in extradition cases. According to 
him, this standard should be lower than proof 
beyond reasonable doubt but higher than 
preponderance of evidence. The potential extraditee 
must prove by "clear and convincing evidence" 
that he is not a flight risk and will abide with all 
the orders and processes of the extradition 
court. 
 
Bail hearings are mandatory 
Bail hearing is necessary even if the prosecution does 
not interpose any objection or leaves the application 
for bail to the sound discretion of the court. A 
hearing is required in order for the court to ascertain 
the adequacy of the amount of bail under the 
guidelines set forth in section 9 rule 114 of the rules 
of criminal procedure.  
 
 Further, failure to conduct a hearing when 
required before fixing bail will violate due process 
and disregard of the established rule of law by 

--- PAGE 77 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
77 
depriving the prosecution of the opportunity to 
prove that the evidence of guilt against the 
accused is strong and will constitute gross 
ignorance of the law or incompetence which will 
subject the judge to disciplinary action. 
Ignorance of this type, cannot be excused by a claim 
of good faith or excusable negligence. Thus, it is still 
mandatory for the court to conduct a hearing and 
ask searching and clarificatory questions for the 
purpose of determining the existence of strong 
evidence against the accused although the 
prosecution interposed no objection to the grant of 
bail or refuse to adduce evidence that the guilt of the 
accused was strong. 
 
In reexamining Purganan the Court made the following 
observation:  
1) The exercise of the state's power to deprive an 
individual of his liberty is not necessarily 
limited to criminal proceedings, 
respondents in administrative proceedings, 
such as deportation and quarantine have 
likewise been detained.  
2) To limit bail to criminal proceedings would 
be to close our eyes to jurisprudential 
history. The Philippine jurisprudence has not 
limited the exercise of the right to bail to 
criminal proceedings only. This court has 
admitted to bail persons who are not involved 
in criminal proceedings. In fact, bail has been 
allowed in jurisdictions to persons in 
detention during the pendency of 
administrative proceedings, taking into 
cognizance the obligation of the Philippines on 
their international convention to uphold 
human rights. 
 
Section 3. No release or transfer except on court 
order or bail. – No person under detention by legal 
process shall be released or transferred except upon 
order of the court or when he is admitted to bail. 
 
5) Recognizance (Rules of Court, Rule 114, 
Sec 1) – an obligation of record entered into 
before some court or magistrate duly 
authorized to take it with a condition to do 
some particular act, the most usual condition 
in criminal cases being the appearance of the 
accused for trial. 
 
A simple personal obligation or undertaking 
entered into before a court and having no 
money penalty attached. It has the effect of 
transferring the custody of the accused from 
the public officials who have him in their 
charge to keepers of his own selection 
 
Section 15. Recognizance. — Whenever allowed by 
law or these Rules, the court may release a person in 
custody to his own recognizance or that of a 
responsible person. (15a) 
 
A person may be released on recognizance in the 
following cases: 
1) When the offense charge is for violation of 
an ordinance, a light felony or a criminal 
offense that imposes a penalty, which does 
not exceed six months imprisonment and or 
a P2000 fine. 
2) When a person has been in custody for a 
period equal to or more than the minimum 
of the imposable principal penalty without 
application of the indeterminate sentence 
law, or any modifying circumstances, in 
which case the court in its discretion may allow 
his release on his own recognizance. (Sec 16) 
3) When the accused has applied for probation 
pending the resolution of the case, but no 
bail was filed, or the accused is incapable of 
filing one. 
 
Probation is a disposition under which a defendant, 
after conviction and sentence, is released subject to a 
condition imposed by the court and under the 
supervision of a probation officer. 
 
4) In case of a youthful offender, held for 
physical and mental examination, trial, or 
appeal, he is unable to furnish bail and under 
circumstances envisaged by PD 603, as 
amended 
 
Where each child is detained, the court shall order the 
release of the minor on recognizance to his or her 
parents and other suitable persons under Section 35 of 
RA 9344. 
 
RA 9344 
Section 24. Release of Children on Recognizance to 
the Parents, Guardian, Custodian or Nearest 
Relative — The release of a child from custody 
during the pendency of the case involving an offense 
not punishable by death, reclusion perpetua or life 
imprisonment may be ordered by the court only 
after a hearing for that purpose, and upon favorable 
recommendation of the social worker assigned to 
the child with due notice to the public prosecutor, 
the Sanggunian where the accused resides, and the 
private complainant. The child shall be released to 
the custody of a willing and responsible mother or 
father, or appropriate guardian or custodian, or in 
their absence, the nearest relative, who shall be 
responsible for the child's good behavior and 
appearance in court whenever required.  
 
No child shall be ordered detained in jail pending 
trial or hearing of the child's case. 
 
Section 25. Commitment and transfer to a Bahay 
Pag-asa. — A child charged with an offense, unless 
released on bail or recognizance, may be transferred 
to a "Bahay Pag-asa" or rehabilitation center or other 
appropriate facility operated or accredited by the 
Department of Social Welfare and Development, 
which shall ensure the implementation of 

--- PAGE 78 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
78 
appropriate intervention programs, as well as the 
safety and appearance of the child in court.  
 
In the absence of a "Bahay Pag-asa" established by 
the local government pursuant to Section 8 of the 
Family Courts Act, and Republic Act No. 9344, as 
amended, in the city or municipality where the child 
resides, or a local rehabilitation center recognized by 
the government in the province, city or municipality 
within the jurisdiction of the court, or the 
Department of Social Welfare and Development, or 
other appropriate local rehabilitation center, 
detention pending trial may be replaced by 
alternative measures such as close supervision, 
intensive care or replacement with a family or in an 
educational setting or home. Institutionalization or 
detention of a child pending trial should be used only 
as a last resort and for the shortest possible time. 
 
Section 26. Bail as a Matter of right. — For purposes 
of bail, the privileged mitigating circumstance of 
minority shall be considered. 
 
 
In all cases the giving or posting of a bail bond by 
the accused is tantamount to the submission of his 
person to the jurisdiction of the Court. 
 
Who may invoke? 
1) Arrested  
2) Detained 
3) Deprived of their liberty whether or not an 
information or a criminal complaint has been 
filed  
 
GR: All those who are already in custody of law may 
avail of the right to bail as a matter of right 
XPN: Those charged with offenses punishable with 
reclusion perpetua, when evidence of guilt is strong 
 
Bail may either be: 
1) A matter of right 
2) A matter of discretion 
 
A MATTER OF RIGHT OR DISCRETION 
Section 4. Bail, a matter of right; exception. — All 
persons in custody shall be admitted to bail as a 
matter of right, with sufficient sureties, or released 
on recognize as prescribed by law or this Rule (a) 
before or after conviction by the Metropolitan 
Trial Court, Municipal Trial Court, Municipal 
Trial Court in Cities, or Municipal Circuit Trial 
Court, and (b) before conviction by the Regional 
Trial Court of an offense not punishable by 
death, reclusion perpetua, or life imprisonment. 
(4a) 
 
Section 5. Bail, when discretionary. — Upon 
conviction by the Regional Trial Court of an 
offense not punishable by death, reclusion 
perpetua, or life imprisonment, admission to bail 
is discretionary. The application for bail may be 
filed and acted upon by the trial court despite the 
filing of a notice of appeal, provided it has not 
transmitted the original record to the appellate court. 
However, if the decision of the trial court 
convicting the accused changed the nature of 
the offense from non-bailable to bailable, the 
application for bail can only be filed with and 
resolved by the appellate court. 
 
Should the court grant the application, the accused 
may be allowed to continue on provisional liberty 
during the pendency of the appeal under the same 
bail subject to the consent of the bondsman. 
 
If the penalty imposed by the trial court is 
imprisonment exceeding six (6) years, the 
accused shall be denied bail, or his bail shall be 
cancelled upon a showing by the prosecution, 
with notice to the accused, of the following or 
other similar circumstances: 
 
(a) That he is a recidivist, quasi-recidivist, or 
habitual delinquent, or has committed the crime 
aggravated by the circumstance of reiteration; 
 
(b) That he has previously escaped from legal 
confinement, evaded sentence, or violated the 
conditions of his bail without valid justification; 
 
(c) That he committed the offense while under 
probation, parole, or conditional pardon; 
 
(d) That the circumstances of his case indicate the 
probability of flight if released on bail; or 
 
(e) That there is undue risk that he may commit 
another crime during the pendency of the appeal. 
 
The appellate court may, motu proprio or on 
motion of any party, review the resolution of the 
Regional Trial Court after notice to the adverse party 
in either case. (5a) 
 
When is bail a matter of right? 
1) Before or after conviction by the Metropolitan 
Trial Court, or first level courts, or while on 
appeal. 
2) Before conviction by a Regional Trial Court 
except if the offense charged is punishable by 
reclusion perpetua, life imprisonment or death, 
where the evidence of guilt is strong. 
3) Before conviction by a Regional trial court for 
death, life imprisonment or reclusion perpetua, 
when the evidence of guilt is not strong. 
 
Remedy 
1) The remedy is a petition for certiorari under 
Rule 65 because the court committed grave 
abuse of discretion amounting to excess or lack 
of jurisdiction for issuing the denial of the bail 
when bail is a matter of right. 
2) Mandamus may also at the same time be 
availed to compel know the grant of bail, which 
is a matter of right When bail is a matter of 
right, the court is left with no discretion but to 
grant the same. 

--- PAGE 79 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
79 
 
Hearing is always required whether it's a matter of 
right or a matter of discretion. 
 
When is bail a matter of discretion? 
1) After conviction by the RTC, if the penalty 
imposed is 6 years or lower 
2) After conviction for an offense which is 
punishable with six (6) years and one (1) day 
to twenty (20) years, if the following 
circumstances are not present: 
a) The accused is a recidivist, quasi-
recidivist or a habitual delinquent or has 
committed the crime aggravated by the 
circumstance of reiteracion. 
b) The accused is found to have previously 
escaped from legal confinement, evaded 
sentence or has violated the conditions of 
his bail without valid justification. 
c) The accused committed the offense while 
on probation, parole or under conditional 
pardon. 
d) The circumstance of the accused or his case 
indicate the probability of flight, if released 
on bail. 
e) There is an undue risk that during the 
pendency of the appeal, the accused may 
commit another crime. 
 
Where to appeal bail? (Sec 5) 
1) When there is already a notice of appeal but the 
entire record of the case has not yet been 
transmitted to the appellate court – RTC 
2) When there is already a notice of appeal and 
the entire record has already been transmitted 
to appellate court – CA 
3) From non-bailable to bailable offense by virtue 
of judgment or conviction - CA 
 
People v. Sandiganbayan 
Even if the capital offense charged is bailable owing to 
the weakness of the evidence of guilt, the right to bail 
may justifiably still be denied if the probability of 
escape is great.  
 
Valero v. CA 
The trial court disregarded the glaring fact that the 
evidence against her was strong because the killer 
himself has confessed to the crime and implicated 
Milagros as the mastermind. 
 
Enrile v. Pimentel 
Flight risk 
Petitioner goes on to allege that unlike Jalosjos who 
attempted to evade trial, he is not a flight risk since he 
voluntarily surrendered to the proper authorities and 
such can be proven by the numerous times he was 
allowed to travel outside his place of detention. 
 
Subsequent events reveal the contrary, however. The 
assailed Orders augured well when on November 29, 
2007 petitioner went past security detail for some 
reason and proceeded from the courtroom to a posh 
hotel to issue certain statements. 
 
Moreover, circumstances indicating probability of 
flight find relevance as a factor in ascertaining the 
reasonable amount of bail and in canceling a 
discretionary grant of bail.  
 
Evidence of guilt 
In cases involving non-bailable offenses, what is 
controlling is the determination of whether the 
evidence of guilt is strong. Once it is established 
that it is so, bail shall be denied as it is neither a 
matter of right nor of discretion. 
 
Qui v. People 
Under the present rule, the grant of bail is a matter 
of discretion upon conviction by the RTC of an 
offense not punishable by death, reclusion 
perpetua or life imprisonment, as here. The Court 
held: 
 
Indeed, pursuant to the "tough on bail pending 
appeal" policy, the presence of bail-negating 
conditions mandates the denial or revocation of 
bail pending appeal such that those circumstances 
are deemed to be as grave as conviction by the trial 
court for an offense punishable by death, reclusion 
perpetua or life imprisonment where bail is 
prohibited. 
 
In the exercise of that discretion, the proper courts are 
to be guided by the fundamental principle that the 
allowance of bail pending appeal should be exercised 
not with laxity but with grave caution and only for 
strong reasons, considering that the accused has 
been in fact convicted by the trial court. 
 
When is bail not allowed?  
1) After final judgment by any court if the period 
to appeal the conviction has already lapsed, 
(within 15 days from the final judgment of 
the court, and the accused did not appeal) 
2) Before conviction by RTC for offenses 
punishable by reclusion perpetua, death or life 
imprisonment when evidence of guilt is 
strong. 
3) After conviction for offenses punishable by 
reclusion perpetua, death or life imprisonment 
(capital offenses) 
Section 6. Capital offense defined. — A capital 
offense is an offense which, under the law 
existing at the time of its commission and of 
the application for admission to bail, may be 
punished with death. (6a) 
 
Section 7. Capital offense of an offense punishable 
by reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment, not 
bailable. — No person charged with a capital 
offense, or an offense punishable by reclusion 
perpetua or life imprisonment, shall be 

--- PAGE 80 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
80 
admitted to bail when evidence of guilt is 
strong, regardless of the stage of the criminal 
prosecution. (7a) 
 
4) After conviction for an offense punishable 
with 6 years and 1 day to 20 years if the 
circumstances that mentioned earlier is 
present. 
 He is a recidivist, quasi-recidivist or 
habitual delinquent or has 
committed a crime aggravated by 
reiteracion. 
 He has escaped from confinement, 
evaded sentence or violated the 
conditions of his bail without valid 
justification 
 He committed the offense while under 
probation, parole or conditional 
pardon 
 The circumstances of the case indicate 
the probability of flight if released on 
bail 
 There is undue risk that he may 
commit another crime during the 
pendency of appeal. 
 
5) Bail shall not be allowed after the accused has 
commenced to serve the sentence. 
 
Test of great presumption of guilt 
The court is ministerially bound to decide which 
circumstances and factors are present, which would 
show evidence of guilt or presumption of guilt. It does 
not mean that proof of guilt is beyond reasonable 
doubt. 
 
Leviste v. CA 
The discretionary nature of the grant of bail pending 
appeal does not mean that the bail should be 
automatically granted absent of any of the 
circumstances mentioned in the third 
paragraph of Section 5. Thus, a finding that none 
of the said circumstances is present will not 
automatically result in the grant of bail. Such a 
finding absent of any of the circumstances will 
simply authorize the court to use a less stringent 
sound discretion approach. 
 
Narciso v. Sta Romana-Cruz 
The court enumerated the following duties of the 
trial judge in a petition for bail in the offenses as 
mentioned:  
a) Notify the prosecutor of the hearing or the 
application for bail or require him to submit 
their recommendation;  
b) Conduct a hearing of the application for bail 
regardless of whether or not the prosecution 
refuses to present evidence to show that the 
guilt of the accused is strong for the purpose 
of enabling the court to exercise its sound 
discretion  
c) Decide whether the evidence of guilt of the 
accused is strong based on the summary of 
evidence of the prosecution.  
d) If the guilt of the accused is not strong, 
discharge the accused upon the approval of 
the bail bond, otherwise the petition should 
be denied. 
 
People v. De Gracia 
Bail may be granted if the evidence of guilt is not strong 
A person, even if he is charged with a crime punishable 
by reclusion perpetua, may still be granted bail as a 
matter of right when the evidence of guilt is not 
strong. 
 
Necessarily, in all other instances, bail must be granted 
before the conviction of the accused. The right to bail 
flows from the presumption of innocence in favor 
of every accused who should not be subjected to 
the loss of freedom as thereafter, he would be 
entitled to acquittal unless his guilt is proved 
beyond reasonable doubt. 
 
Evident proof of guilt  
Proof evident or evident proof, in this connection, has 
been held to make clear strong evidence which 
leads a well-guarded dispassionate judge to the 
conclusion that the offense has been committed as 
charge that the accused is the guilty agent and that 
he will probably be punished capitally if the law is 
administered. 
 
Enrile v. People 
Issue: Whether or not the denial of Enrile’s motion to 
fix bail is tainted with grave abuse of discretion 
 
Ruling: 
Presumption of innocence and right to bail 
The presumption of innocence is rooted in the 
guarantee of due process and is safeguarded by the 
constitutional right to be released on bail and further 
binds the court to wait until after the trial to impose 
any punishment on the accused. 
 
Discretion of trial court 
The general rule is any person, before being convicted 
of any criminal offense, shall be bailable unless he is 
charged with a capital offense or with an offense 
punishable with reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment 
and evidence of guilt is strong. Once it is established 
that the evidence of guilt is strong, no right to bail shall 
be recognized. The determination of whether or not 
evidence of guilt is strong in criminal cases 
involving capital offenses or offenses punishable 
with reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment lies 
with the discretion of the trial court. 
 
Bail hearing 
The hearing is mandatory before bail can be granted to 
an accused who is charged with a capital offense. 
Further, certain guidelines in the fixing of a bail bond 

--- PAGE 81 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
81 
call for the presentation of evidence and reasonable 
opportunity for the prosecution to refute it. Among 
them are the nature and circumstances of the crime, 
character and reputation of the accused, the weight of 
the evidence against him, the probability of the accused 
appearing at the trial whether or not the accused is a 
fugitive from justice and whether or not the accused is 
under bond and in any other cases. To determine the 
evidence there must be a hearing conducted by the 
court which may either be a summary hearing, or 
it may be a full-blown hearing in the discretion of 
the court. 
Bail applications are tried in the RTC 
In resolving bail applications of the accused who is 
charged with the capital offence or an offence 
punishable by reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment, the 
trial judge is expected to comply with the following 
guidelines: 
 
1) In all cases, whether bail is a matter of right or 
of discretion, notify the prosecutor of the 
hearing of the application for bail or require 
him to submit his recommendation. 
2) Where bail is a matter of discretion, conduct a 
hearing of the application for bail regardless 
of whether or not the prosecution refuses to 
present evidence to show that the guilt of the 
accused is strong for the purpose of enabling 
the court to exercise it sound discretion. 
3) Decide whether the guilt of the accused is 
strong based on the summary of evidence 
of the prosecution. 
4) The guilt of the accused is not strong, discharge 
accused upon the approval of the bail bond 
otherwise, petition should be denied. 
 
The Court cited Enrile’s poor health and the presence 
of the averment by Enrile and his motion to fix a bail 
of the presence of two mitigating circumstances: 1) that 
he is already over 70 years and 2.) that he voluntarily 
surrendered.  
The Supreme Court then said that in their view, the 
social and political standing of Enrile and his having 
immediately surrendered to the authorities upon being 
charged in Court indicate that the risk of his flight or 
escape from his jurisdiction is highly unlikely. His 
personal disposition from the onset of his indictment 
for plunder formal or otherwise has demonstrated his 
utter respect for the legal processes of the Philippines. 
 
People v. Valdez 
In this case, the crime is complex crime of malversation 
of public funds through falsification of official or 
public documents. This case is punishable by reclusion 
temporal in its maximum period to reclusion perpetua. 
Since it is a complex crime, the Ombudsman argues 
that it is the maximum of the prescribed penalty which 
is reclusion perpetua should be considered and therefore 
bail is not a matter of right.  
 
But the Supreme Court said that since we have not yet 
gone into the trial on the merits of the case, we should 
not yet venture into the imposable penalty of the 
particular complex crime. Since the prescribed 
penalty here is a minimum of reclusion temporal 
in its maximum period to reclusion perpetua, this 
is not the case which is punishable by reclusion 
perpetua only. 
 
Therefore, since the interpretation that is more 
favorable to the accused is this one is a case where bail 
is a matter of right, then the Supreme Court, for the 
purposes of bail application, an accused charge with 
the complex crime of malversation of public 
documents through falsification of official or public 
documents that involve that amount in excess of 
22,000 is entitled to file bail as a matter of right. A 
summary hearing on bail application is therefore 
unnecessary since bail should be granted as a 
matter of right. 
 
People v. Piad 
The Supreme Court held that an accused which 
jumps bail cannot be granted bail after conviction 
even if he appeals the conviction because under 
Section 5(b) of Rule 114 on the matter of bail, bail 
cannot be granted to a person who has previously 
escaped from legal confinement, evaded sentence 
or violated the conditions of his bail without valid 
justification. 
 
People v. Escobar 
The Supreme Court said that the concept of or 
principle or doctrine of res judicata or matter or 
judge is not applicable to bail proceedings. Res 
judicata is a civil law concept and is not applicable to 
criminal cases. Res judicata settles with finality the 
dispute between the parties or their successors-in-
interest in civil cases and this principle in civil law has 
no bearing in criminal proceedings. 
 
 
Is bail applicable to all court proceedings? 
GR: Bail is only available in criminal proceedings 
 
Bail is not available in the following instances 
1) Deportation or extradition proceedings 
 Extradition proceedings are not 
criminal in nature 
 It is a public international law concept 
2) When there is already waiver of the right 
3) The right to bail is traditionally not recognized 
and is not available in the military, as an 
exception to the general rule embodied in the 
Bill of Rights. 
XPN: the military is involved in a criminal 
action 
 The right to a speedy trial is given 
more emphasis in a military setting but 
the right to bail does not exist. 

--- PAGE 82 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
82 
 Military personnel are a class on their 
own, they are not the same as civilians 
 
Comendador v. De Villa 
Right to bail of military personnel 
The right to bail shall not be granted to military 
personnel charge before the military courts for 
violations of the articles of the military. They do not 
enjoy the right to bail due to the nature of the charges 
against them. If they will be charged in the ordinary 
courts however for ordinary crimes or offenses, then, 
the right to bail is available to them. 
 
Aswat v. Galido 
Right to bail of military personnel 
When a person, which is part of the military is subject 
to military law under the articles of war (Article 70) 
“Any person subject to military law charged with a 
crime or with serious offense under this article, shall be 
placed in confinement or in arrest as circumstances 
may require.” The confinement of military personnel 
in cases under the general court martial, is one way of 
ensuring the presence during the sessions of the 
general court martial. The more important reason 
underlying the authority to impose confinement, is the 
need to enable the proper military authority to 
instill discipline, with a command and thereby 
achieve command efficiency. By confining the 
military personnel, the military may effectively curtail 
the spreading within the ranks of the military the un-
military conduct of the military personnel charged 
under the general court martial. The release from 
confinement of a person subject to military law facing 
charges before a general court martial is a matter that 
lies largely in the discretion of the military 
authorities who are in a better position to 
appreciate the gravity of the said charges and the 
advisability of releasing him pending trial and 
disposition of the case filed against him. 
The Government of the United States of 
America v. Purganan 
Extradition proceedings 
The Supreme Court held that the constitutional 
provision on bail does not apply to extradition 
proceedings. It is available only in criminal 
proceedings. 
In extradition proceedings, prospective extraditees are 
generally not entitled to notice and hearing before 
warrants for their arrest can be issued. Neither are 
they entitled to the right to bail and provisional 
liberty while the extradition proceedings are 
pending.  
The policy is that a prospective extraditee is arrested 
and detained, to avoid his flight from justice. On the 
extraditee lies the burden of showing that he will not 
flee once bail is granted. 
The extradition court is that called upon to ascertain 
the guilt or the innocence of the person sought to be 
extradited. The ultimate purpose of extradition 
proceedings in court is only to determine whether 
the extradition request complies with the 
extradition treaty applicable, and whether the 
person sought is extraditable. 
 
Exception 
Accordingly and to best serve the ends of justice, we 
believe and so hold that, after a potential  extraditee has 
been arrested or placed under the custody of the law, 
bail may be applied for and granted as an exception, 
only upon a clear and convincing showing (1) that, 
once granted bail, the applicant will not be a flight 
risk or a danger to the community; and (2) that 
there exist special, humanitarian and compelling 
circumstances  including, as a matter of 
reciprocity, those cited by the highest court in the 
requesting state when it grants provisional liberty in 
extradition cases therein. 
 
xxx First, we note that the exercise of the State’s power 
to deprive an individual of his liberty is not necessarily 
limited to criminal proceedings. Respondents in 
administrative proceedings, such as deportation 
and quarantine, have likewise been detained. 
Second, to limit bail to criminal proceedings would 
be to close our eyes to our jurisprudential history. 
 
Government of Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region v. Olalia Jr. 
In a subsequent ruling in the case of Government of Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region vs. Olalia Jr. somehow 
abandoned the ruling in the case of Purganan. The 
Supreme Court ruled that following the trends in 
international law;  
5) The growing importance of the individual 
person in public international law, who, in 
the 20th century has gradually attained global 
recognition. 
6) The higher value now being given to 
human rights in the international sphere. 
7) The corresponding duty of the countries to 
observe this universal human rights in 
fulfilling their treaty obligation. And; 
8) The duty of the Supreme Court to balance the 
rights of the individual under our 
fundamental law on one hand, in the law on 
extradition on the other. 
 
Extradition proceeding being sui generis 
The standard of proof required in granting or denying 
bail can neither be the proof beyond reasonable 
doubt in criminal cases nor the standard of proof 
of preponderance of evidence in civil cases. While 
administrative in character, the standard of substantial 
evidence used in administrative cases cannot 
likewise apply given the object of extradition law 
which is to prevent the prospective extraditee from 
fleeing our jurisdiction. In his Separate Opinion in 
Purganan, then Associate Justice, now Chief Justice 
Reynato S. Puno, proposed that a new standard which 

--- PAGE 83 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
83 
he termed "clear and convincing evidence" should 
be used in granting bail in extradition cases. According 
to him, this standard should be lower than proof 
beyond reasonable doubt but higher than 
preponderance of evidence. The potential extraditee 
must prove by "clear and convincing evidence" that 
he is not a flight risk and will abide with all the 
orders and processes of the extradition court. 
 
Bail hearings are mandatory 
Bail hearing is necessary even if the prosecution does 
not interpose any objection or leaves the application 
for bail to the sound discretion of the court. A hearing 
is required in order for the court to ascertain the 
adequacy of the amount of bail under the guidelines set 
forth in section 9 rule 114 of the rules of criminal 
procedure.  
 
 Further, failure to conduct a hearing when 
required before fixing bail will violate due process 
and disregard of the established rule of law by 
depriving the prosecution of the opportunity to 
prove that the evidence of guilt against the 
accused is strong and will constitute gross 
ignorance of the law or incompetence which will 
subject the judge to disciplinary action. Ignorance 
of this type, cannot be excused by a claim of good faith 
or excusable negligence. Thus, it is still mandatory for 
the court to conduct a hearing and ask searching and 
clarificatory questions for the purpose of determining 
the existence of strong evidence against the accused 
although the prosecution interposed no objection to 
the grant of bail or refuse to adduce evidence that the 
guilt of the accused was strong. 
 
AS A MATTER OF DISCRETION – Hearing is 
mandatory 
AS A MATTER OF RIGHT – Not mandatory, 
essential only in determining the amount of bail.  
 
PROHIBITION AGAINST EXCESSIVE BAIL 
The Constitution ordains that excessive bail shall not 
be required, and this is a restriction on both  
1) the courts and  
2) the Congress 
 
What amount is a reasonable bail rest mainly upon the 
discretion of the judge. He has to take into account the 
following in deciding the matter: 
 
BURDEN OF PROOF 
Section 8. Burden of proof in bail application. — At the 
hearing of an application for bail filed by a person 
who is in custody for the commission of an offense 
punishable by death, reclusion perpetua, or life 
imprisonment, the prosecution has the burden of 
showing that evidence of guilt is strong. The 
evidence presented during the bail hearing shall be 
considered automatically reproduced at the trial, 
but upon motion of either party, the court may recall 
any witness for additional examination unless the 
latter is dead, outside the Philippines, or 
otherwise unable to testify. (8a) 
 
HEARING 
GR: Evidence that has been presented during bail 
hearing shall be considered automatically reproduced 
at the trial 
XPN: Possible recall of witnesses for additional 
examination  
XPN of XPN: The witness is dead, outside the 
Philippines or otherwise unable to testify. 
 
Where there is no necessity to determine whether the 
guilt of the accused is strong or not, the judge is still 
mandated to:  
1) Conduct a hearing in cases where the 
prosecution chooses to just file a comment; or  
2) Leave the application for bail to the discretion 
of the court; or  
3) If the prosecution refuses to adduce evidence 
in opposition to the application, to grant and 
fix bail; or  
4) The prosecution has interposed no objection 
to the grant of bail of the accused. 
 
There is no necessity to determine whether the 
guilt of the accused is strong or not when:  
1) The prosecution chooses to just file a 
comment; 
2) Leave the application for bail to the discretion 
of the court; 
3) If the prosecution refuses to adduce evidence 
in opposition to the application to grant and fix 
bail;  
4) The prosecution posts no objection to the 
grant of bail to the accused. 
 
Hearing 
As a matter of right As a matter of 
discretion 
1. Determine whether or 
not there is a reduction 
or increase in the 
amount of bail. 2. 
Determine the 
conditions pertinent to 
the grant of bail if ever 
it is granted. 
To determine whether 
the guilt is strong 
the prosecution does not 
have the right to present 
evidence for the denial 
of bail 
the prosecution has the 
right to present evidence 
for the denial of bail 
At the hearing of an application for bail filed by a 
person who is in custody for the commission of an 
offense punishable by death, reclusion perpetua, or 
life imprisonment, the prosecution has the burden 
of showing that evidence of guilt is strong. 
 
GUIDELINES FOR AMOUNT OF BAIL 
Section 9. Amount of bail; guidelines. — The judge 
who issued the warrant or granted the application 

--- PAGE 84 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
84 
shall fix a reasonable amount of bail considering 
primarily, but not limited to, the following factors: 
 
(a) Financial ability of the accused to give bail; 
(b) Nature and circumstances of the offense; 
(c) Penalty for the offense charged; 
(d) Character and reputation of the accused; 
(e) Age and health of the accused; 
(f) Weight of the evidence against the accused; 
(g) Probability of the accused appearing at the 
trial; 
(h) Forfeiture of other bail; 
(i) The fact that accused was a fugitive from justice 
when arrested; and 
(j) Pendency of other cases where the accused is 
on bail. 
 
Excessive bail shall not be required. (9a) 
 
The amount fixed should be sufficient to ensure the 
presence of the accused at a trial yet reasonable enough 
to comply with a constitutional provision that bail 
should not be excessive. 
 
Lardizabal v. Reyes 
When an accused is charged with a serious offense 
punishable with reclusion perpetua, such as rape, bail 
may be granted only after a motion for that purpose 
has been filed by the accused in a hearing thereon 
conducted by the judge to determine whether the 
prosecution's evidence guilt is strong. 
 
WAIVER 
People v. Panes 
Such negligence, in not calling out that the court has 
not yet acted upon, is already a waiver of the right 
of the accused to ask for bail. Failure to bring to the 
attention of the trial court at the earliest opportune 
time that the court has not resolved the application for 
a bail is already a waiver of their right to bail. 
 
BURDEN OF PROOF 
Section 8. Burden of proof in bail application. — At the 
hearing of an application for bail filed by a person 
who is in custody for the commission of an offense 
punishable by death, reclusion perpetua, or life 
imprisonment, the prosecution has the burden of 
showing that evidence of guilt is strong. The 
evidence presented during the bail hearing shall be 
considered automatically reproduced at the trial, 
but upon motion of either party, the court may recall 
any witness for additional examination unless the 
latter is dead, outside the Philippines, or otherwise 
unable to testify. (8a) 
 
HEARING 
 GR: Evidence that has been presented during 
bail hearing shall be considered automatically 
reproduced at the trial 
 XPN: Possible recall of witnesses for 
additional examination  
 XPN of XPN: The witness is dead, outside 
the Philippines or otherwise unable to testify. 
 
There is no necessity to determine whether the 
guilt of the accused is strong or not when:  
5) The prosecution chooses to just file a 
comment; 
6) Leave the application for bail to the discretion 
of the court; 
7) If the prosecution refuses to adduce evidence 
in opposition to the application to grant and fix 
bail;  
8) The prosecution posts no objection to the 
grant of bail to the accused. 
 
REQUIREMENT OF BAIL 
Section 16. Bail, when not required; reduced bail or 
recognizance. — No bail shall be required when the law 
or these Rules so provide. 
 
When a person has been in custody for a period 
equal to or more than the possible maximum 
imprisonment prescribe for the offense charged, 
he shall be released immediately, without 
prejudice to the continuation of the trial or the 
proceedings on appeal. If the maximum penalty to 
which the accused may be sentenced is destierro, he 
shall be released after thirty (30) days of 
preventive imprisonment. 
 
A person in custody for a period equal to or more 
than the minimum of the principal penalty 
prescribed for the offense charged, without 
application of the Indeterminate Sentence Law 
or any modifying circumstance, shall be released 
on a reduced bail or on his own recognizance, at 
the discretion of the court. (16a) 
 
Q: When is bail not required? 
A:  
1) GR: When a person has been in custody for a 
period equal to or more than the possible 
maximum imprisonment prescribe for the 
offense charged – RELEASED 
IMMEDIATELY  
XPN:  
 If the maximum penalty to which 
the accused may be sentenced is 
destierro, he shall be released 
AFTER 30 DAYS OF 
PREVENTIVE 
IMPRISONMENT 
 A person in custody for a period 
equal to or more than the 
minimum of the principal penalty 
prescribed for the offense charged, 
without application of the 
Indeterminate Sentence Law or any 
modifying circumstance – 
RELEASED ON A REDUCED 
BAIL OR RECOGNIZANCE 
2) Violation of municipal or city ordinance, a 
light felony or criminal offense that 
prescribe penalty which is higher than six 

--- PAGE 85 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
85 
(6) months imprisonment and/or a fine of 
2000 pesos, or both, where said person has 
established to the satisfaction of the Court or 
any other appropriate authority hearing his case 
that he is unable to post required cash or bail 
bond, except when: 
a) When he was caught committing the 
offense in flagrante delicto; 
b) When he confesses to the 
commission of the offense unless the 
confession is later repudiated by him 
in a sworn statement, or in open Court 
as having been extracted through force 
or intimidation; 
c) When he is found to be previously 
escaped from legal confinement, 
evaded sentence, or jumped bail; 
d) When he is found to have previously 
violated the provisions of Section 2 
Republic Act 6036, otherwise known 
as An Act Providing that Bail shall not, 
with certain exceptions, be required in 
cases of Violations of Municipal or 
City Ordinances, and in Criminal 
Offenses when the Prescribed Penalty 
for such Offenses is not higher than 
Arresto Mayor and/or a fine of 2000 
pesos, or both; 
e) Habitual delinquency, recidivism, 
reiteracion 
f) When he commits the offenses while 
on parole or under conditional pardon 
and when the accused has previously 
been re-pardoned by the municipal or 
city mayor for violation of municipal 
or city ordinances for at least two (2) 
times. 
3) Criminal Cases falling under the Revised Rule 
on Summary Procedure: 
 Violation of Traffic Laws, Rules, and 
Regulations 
 Violation of Rental Law 
 Violations of Municipal or City 
Ordinances 
 Violation of Batas Pambansa Bilang 22; 
the bouncing checks law 
 And all other criminal cases where the 
penalty prescribed by law for the 
offense charged is imprisonment not 
exceeding six (6) months or a fine not 
exceeding 1000 pesos, or both; 
provided that in offenses involved be 
damage to property, to criminal 
negligence, this Rule shall govern 
where the imposable fine does not 
exceed 10,000 pesos. 
 XPN: When the accused failed to 
appear when required, the bail bond becomes 
required  
4) In cases not requiring preliminary investigation 
nor covered by the Revised Rule on Summary 
Procedure where the municipal trial judge 
satisfied that there is no necessity for placing 
the accused under custody. In which case, 
the judge may issue summons instead of 
warrant of arrest 
 
RULES ON WHERE TO APPLY 
Section 17. Bail, where filed. — (a) Bail in the amount 
fixed may be filed with the court where the case 
is pending, or in the absence or unavailability of 
the judge thereof, with any regional trial judge, 
metropolitan trial judge, municipal trial judge, 
or municipal circuit trial judge in the province, 
city, or municipality. If the accused is arrested in 
a province, city, or municipality other than 
where the case is pending, bail may also be filed 
with any regional trial court of said place, or if no 
judge thereof is available, with any metropolitan 
trial judge, municipal trial judge, or municipal 
circuit trial judge therein. 
 
(b) Where the grant of bail is a matter of discretion, 
or the accused seeks to be released on 
recognizance, the application may only be filed in 
the court where the case is pending, whether on 
preliminary investigation, trial, or on appeal. 
 
(c) Any person in custody who is not yet charged 
in court may apply for bail with any court in the 
province, city, or municipality where he is held. (17a) 
 
Rules on where to apply bail 
1) When judge is present, filed with the 
court where the case is pending 
2) In the absence or unavailability of the 
judge thereof, with any regional trial 
judge, metropolitan trial judge, 
municipal trial judge, or municipal 
circuit trial judge in the province, 
city, or municipality. 
3) If bail is a matter of discretion - 
application may only be filed in the 
court where the case is pending, 
whether on preliminary 
investigation, trial, or on appeal 
4) Any person in custody who is not yet 
charged in court may apply for bail 
with any court where he is held 
5) The application for bail may be filed 
and acted upon by the trial Court even 
if the notice of an appeal has already 
been filed provided that the Trial Court 
has not yet transmitted the original 
record of the Appellate Court under 
Section 5 of Rule 114. 
6) Corollarily, if the original record has 
already been transmitted to the 
Appellate Court, then the application 
shall be filed with the said Appellate 
Court. 
 
NOTICE OF APPLICATION TO PROSECUTOR 

--- PAGE 86 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
86 
Section 18. Notice of application to prosecutor. — In the 
application for bail under section 8 of this Rule, the 
court must give reasonable notice of the hearing 
to the prosecutor or require him to submit his 
recommendation. (18a) 
 
For this purpose, the judge must not disregard the 
mandatory (3) three – day notice under Section 4, 
Rule 15 of the Rules of Court which requires that the 
notice of a motion must be served on all parties at least 
3 days in advance of the hearing. 
 
Even if there is yet to be a motion filed in Court, notice 
of the application of bail to the prosecution is required 
although no bail yet is filed in Court and even though 
the circumstance bail is a matter of right. 
 
The non – compliance to the above requirement 
constitutes ignorance or incompetence which cannot 
be excused by any protestation on good faith 
 
RELEASE 
Section 19. Release on bail. — The accused must be 
discharged upon approval of the bail by the judge 
with whom it was filed in accordance with section 17 
of this Rule. 
 
Whenever bail is filed with a court other than where 
the case is pending, the judge who accepted the 
bail shall forward it, together with the order of 
release and other supporting papers, to the court 
where the case is pending, which may, for good 
reason, require a different one to be filed. (19a) 
 
INCREASE OR DECREASE 
Section 20. Increase or reduction of bail. — After the 
accused is admitted to bail, the court may, upon 
good cause, either increase or reduce its 
amount. When increased, the accused may be 
committed to custody if he does not give bail in the 
increased amount within a reasonable period. An 
accused held to answer a criminal charge, who is 
released without bail upon filing of the complaint or 
information, may, at any subsequent stage of the 
proceedings and whenever a strong showing of guilt 
appears to the court, be required to give bail in the 
amount fixed, or in lieu thereof, committed to 
custody. (20a) 
 
FORFEITURE 
Section 21. Forfeiture of bond. — When the presence 
of the accused is required by the court or these 
Rules, his bondsmen shall be notified to produce 
him before the court on a given date and time. 
If the accused fails to appear in person as required, 
his bail shall be declared forfeited and the 
bondsmen given thirty (30) days within which to 
produce their principal and to show cause why no 
judgment should be rendered against them for the 
amount of their bail. Within the said period, the 
bondsmen must: 
 
(a) produce the body of their principal or give the 
reason for his non-production; and 
 
(b) explain why the accused did not appear 
before the court when first required to do so. 
 
Failing in these two requisites, a judgment shall be 
rendered against the bondsmen, jointly and 
severally, for the amount of the bail. The court shall 
not reduce or otherwise mitigate the liability of the 
bondsmen, unless the accused has been surrendered 
or is acquitted. (21a) 
 
When the accused fails to appear: 
1) The bond may be forfeited 
 Provisional judgment subject to the 
bondsmen to produce the body of the 
accused, explain satisfactorily why he 
cannot produce the accused 
 If the bondsman successfully produced 
the body of the accused, he is absolved 
from liability 
2) The judge may order a bench warrant 
 
Relief from liability of the surety 
1) Act of God 
 Within the first category is the case of 
a principal who dies before the day of 
the performance, but the death of the 
principal in such an undertaking after 
the judgment has been obtained 
thereon because of the non-appearance 
of the accused does not release the 
sureties from their obligation 
 If the death of the accused is explained 
within the 30-day period, then the 
court will not be justified in forfeiting 
the bail. 
2) Act of obligee or government 
3) Act of law 
 section 21, the forfeiture of the bond is 
not mandatory, it is discretionary upon 
the court 
 The judgment rendered against a bond 
may also be appealed by the bondsman. 
The appeal must be perfected within 
the unextendible 15 days following 
the date upon which the sureties 
receive notification of the order 
directing the execution of the judgment 
of the forfeiture of the bond previously 
entered. 
 
Effect of acquittal or dismissal 
Where the dismissal took place long after the 30-day 
period has elapsed, the fact that the criminal 
prosecution is finally dismissed on the motion of a 
fiscal does not relieved the bondsman of an accused 
from the effects of a previous forfeiture of the bond 
consequent upon non-appearance of the accused at 
that time originally set for hearing. 
 
But where the order of acquittal was promulgated five 
days before the expiration of the 30-day period, the 

--- PAGE 87 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
87 
bondsmen was relieved of its duty to produce the body 
of the accused and to show cause why no judgment 
should be rendered against it for the amount of the 
bond. 
 
CANCELLATION 
Section 22. Cancellation of bail. — Upon application 
of the bondsmen, with due notice to the 
prosecutor, the bail may be cancelled upon 
surrender of the accused or proof of his death. 
 
The bail shall be deemed automatically cancelled 
upon acquittal of the accused, dismissal of the 
case, or execution of the judgment of 
conviction. 
 
In all instances, the cancellation shall be without 
prejudice to any liability on the bond. (22a) 
 Incumbent on the bondsmen to petition the 
court for the cancellation 
 If deemed automatically cancelled, no 
petition is required (in cases of acquittal, 
dismissal, execution of judgment) 
 Property bond if there is failure to cause the 
annotation of the lien 
 
RE-ARREST 
Section 23. Arrest of accused out on bail. — For the 
purpose of surrendering the accused, the 
bondsmen may arrest him or, upon written 
authority endorsed on a certified copy of the 
undertaking, cause him to be arrested by a 
police officer or any other person of suitable age 
and discretion. 
 
An accused released on bail may be re-arrested 
without the necessity of a warrant if he attempts to 
depart from the Philippines without permission of 
the court where the case is pending. (23a) 
 
NO BAIL AFTER FINAL JUDGMENT 
Section 24. No bail after final judgment; exception. — No 
bail shall be allowed after the judgment of conviction 
has become final. If before such finality, the accused 
has applies for probation, he may be allowed 
temporary liberty under his bail. When no bail 
was filed or the accused is incapable of filing 
one, the court may allow his release on 
recognizance to the custody of a responsible 
member of the community. In no case shall bail 
be allowed after the accused has commenced to 
serve sentence. (24a) 
 
COURT SUPERVISION OF DETAINEES 
Section 25. Court supervision of detainees. — The court 
shall exercise supervision over all persons in custody 
for the purpose of eliminating unnecessary 
detention. The executive judges of the Regional Trial 
Courts shall conduct monthly personal inspections 
of provincial, city, and municipal jails and their 
prisoners within their respective jurisdictions. They 
shall ascertain the number of detainees, inquire on 
their proper accommodation and health and 
examine the condition of the jail facilities. They shall 
order the segregation of sexes and of minors from 
adults, ensure the observance of the right of 
detainees to confer privately with counsel, and strive 
to eliminate conditions inimical to the detainees. 
 
In cities and municipalities to be specified by the 
Supreme Court, the municipal trial judges or 
municipal circuit trial judges shall conduct monthly 
personal inspections of the municipal jails in their 
respective municipalities and submit a report to the 
executive judge of the Regional Trial Court having 
jurisdiction therein. 
 
A monthly report of such visitation shall be 
submitted by the executive judges to the Court 
Administrator which shall state the total number of 
detainees, the names of those held for more than 
thirty (30) days, the duration of detention, the crime 
charged, the status of the case, the cause for 
detention, and other pertinent information. (25a) 
 
BAIL NOT A BAR 
Section 26. Bail not a bar to objections on illegal arrest, 
lack of or irregular preliminary investigation. — An 
application for or admission to bail shall not bar the 
accused from challenging the validity of his arrest 
or the legality of the warrant issued therefor, or 
from assailing the regularity or questioning the 
absence of a preliminary investigation of the 
charge against him, provided that he raises them 
before entering his plea. The court shall resolve the 
matter as early as practicable but not later than the 
start of the trial of the case. (n) 
 These must be raised before he enters 
his pleas 
 Not deemed a waiver 
 The mere application for bail 
constitutes a waiver of the defense of 
lack of jurisdiction over the person 
of the accused. This is because upon 
application for bail, affirmative relief 
is sought, thus, one is considered to 
have voluntarily appeared before 
the court 
 
Section 26 abandons the previous rulings of the 
Supreme Court, that the filing of a bail is deemed a 
waiver of this instances on the irregularity of the 
issuance of the warrant of arrest, or challenging the lack 
of preliminary investigation. 
 
1) the invalidity of the arrest,  
2) the illegality of the issuance of the warrant of 
arrest or  
3) the irregularity or absence of a preliminary 
investigation 
 
Court cannot require arraignment before the grant of 
bail 
It was held that the grant of bail should not be 
conditioned upon the prior arraignment of the 
accused. In cases where bail is authorized, bail 
should be granted before arraignment otherwise the 

--- PAGE 88 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
88 
accused would be precluded from filing a motion to 
quash, which is to be done before arraignment. If the 
information is quashed and the case is dismissed, 
there would be no need for the arraignment of the 
accused. 
 
The court explained the condition the grant of bail 
on his arraignment would be to place him in a 
position where he has to choose between:  
 
1) filing of a motion to quash and thus, delay 
his release until his motion can be resolved 
because prior to its resolution, he cannot be 
arraigned; or  
2)  foregoing the filing of a motion to quash so 
that he can be arraigned at once and 
thereafter be released on bail.  
 
These scenarios undermine the accused’s 
constitutional right not to be put on trial except 
upon a valid complaint or information sufficient to 
charge him with a crime and his right to bail. 
(Levides v. CA) 
 
Concept of a bench warrant 
A bench warrant is defined as a writ issued directly 
by a judge to a law enforcement officer for the 
arrest of a person who has been held in contempt, has  
1) disobeyed a subpoena or 
2)  who has to appear at the hearing or trial. 
 
The provisions on bench warrant is found under 
Section 9 of Rule 71 of the Rules of Court. 
 
RULE 71, Section 9. Proceeding when party released 
on bail fails to answer. — When a respondent 
released on bail fails to appear on the day fixed for 
the hearing, the court may issue another order of 
arrest or may order the bond for his appearance to 
be forfeited and confiscated, or both; and, if the 
bond be proceeded against, the measure of damages 
shall be the extent of the loss or injury sustained by 
the aggrieved party by reason of the misconduct for 
which the contempt charge was prosecuted, with the 
costs of the proceedings, and such recovery shall be 
for the benefit of the party injured. If there is no 
aggrieved party, the bond shall be liable and 
disposed of as in criminal cases. 
 
RULE 119, Section 14. Bail to secure appearance of 
material witness. — When the court is satisfied, upon 
proof or oath, that a material witness will not testify 
when required, it may, upon motion of either party, 
order the witness to post bail in such sum as may be 
deemed proper. Upon refusal to post bail, the court 
shall commit him to prison until he complies or is 
legally discharged after his testimony has been taken. 
 
So, under Section 14 of Rule 119, bail does not only 
apply to a person who has transgressed the law or is 
perceived to have done so, it may likewise apply to a 
material witness. Also, while the rule is that bail does 
not apply to a person who is not in custody of the law, 
bail to secure the appearance of a material witness does 
not require prior custody of the law. The witness may 
be ordered to post bail even if he is not under 
detention. It is only when he refuses to post bail, shall 
he be committed to prison. 
 
In case where the court requires bail for the presence 
of witnesses, there is no need that they be under the 
custody of the law first. However, if they fail to post 
bail, they can be ordered arrested. 
 
RULE 110, Section 14. Amendment or substitution. 
— A complaint or information may be amended, in 
form or in substance, without leave of court, at any 
time before the accused enters his plea. After the 
plea and during the trial, a formal amendment may 
only be made with leave of court and when it can be 
done without causing prejudice to the rights of the 
accused.  
 
However, any amendment before plea, which 
downgrades the nature of the offense charged in or 
excludes any accused from the complaint or 
information, can be made only upon motion by the 
prosecutor, with notice to the offended party and 
with leave of court. The court shall state its reasons 
in resolving the motion and copies of its order shall 
be furnished all parties, especially the offended party. 
(n)  
 
If it appears at any time before judgment that a 
mistake has been made in charging the proper 
offense, the court shall dismiss the original 
complaint or information upon the filing of a new 
one charging the proper offense in accordance with 
section 19, Rule 119, provided the accused shall not 
be placed in double jeopardy. The court may require 
the witnesses to give bail for their appearance at the 
trial. 
 
RULE 115 
RIGHTS OF ACCUSED 
 
Section 1. Rights of accused at the trial. — In all criminal 
prosecutions, the accused shall be entitled to the 
following rights:  
a) To be presumed innocent until the 
contrary is proved beyond 
reasonable doubt.  
b) To be informed of the nature and 
cause of the accusation against him. 
c) To be present and defend in person 
and by counsel at every stage of the 
proceedings, from arraignment to 
promulgation of the judgment. The 
accused may, however, waive his 
presence at the trial pursuant to the 
stipulations set forth in his bail, 
unless his presence is specifically 
ordered by the court for purposes of 
identification. The absence of the 
accused without justifiable cause at 
the trial of which he had notice shall 
be considered a waiver of his right 
to be present thereat. When an 
accused under custody escapes, he 

--- PAGE 89 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
89 
shall be deemed to have waived his 
right to be present on all subsequent 
trial dates until custody over him is 
regained. Upon motion, the accused 
may be allowed to defend himself in 
person when it sufficiently appears 
to the court that he can properly 
protect his right without the 
assistance of counsel.  
d) To testify as a witness in his own 
behalf but subject to cross-
examination on matters covered by 
direct examination. His silence shall 
not in any manner prejudice him. 
e) To be exempt from being 
compelled to be a witness against 
himself.  
f) To confront and cross-examine the 
witnesses against him at the trial. 
Either party may utilize as part of its 
evidence the testimony of a witness 
who is deceased, out of or cannot 
with due diligence be found in the 
Philippines, unavailable or 
otherwise unable to testify, given in 
another case or proceeding, judicial 
or administrative, involving the 
same parties and subject matter, the 
adverse party having the 
opportunity to cross-examine him.  
g) To have compulsory process issued 
to secure the attendance of 
witnesses and production of other 
evidence in his behalf. (h) To have 
speedy, impartial and public trial. (i) 
To appeal in all cases allowed and in 
the manner prescribed by law. 
 
Article III, 1987 Constitution 
Section 14.  
1) No person shall be held to answer for a 
criminal offense without due process of law  
2) In all criminal prosecutions, the accused 
shall be presumed innocent until the 
contrary is proved, and shall enjoy the right 
to be heard by himself and counsel, to be 
informed of the nature and cause of the 
accusation against him, to have a speedy, 
impartial, and public trial, to meet the 
witnesses face to face, and to have 
compulsory process to secure the attendance 
of witnesses and the production of evidence 
in his behalf. However, after arraignment, 
trial may proceed notwithstanding the 
absence of the accused provided that he has 
been duly notified and his failure to appear 
is unjustifiable. 
 
Right to presumption of innocence 
The presumption of innocence is also applicable to 
persons arrested, detained, or under custodial 
investigation.  
 
It is the prosecution that is required to present its 
evidence ahead of the defense. 
XPN: reverse trial order 
 
The presumption of innocence of the accused is a very 
high presumption. For example, it cannot be overcome 
by just simply stating that the duty of the law 
enforcement officers have been regularly performed. 
the burden of proof of the prosecution is to prove that 
the crime was committed by the accused, and that his 
guilt is beyond reasonable doubt. 
 
The one prosecuting the crime, as the plaintiff to prove 
beyond reasonable doubt, not only each element of the 
crime, and also the circumstances if it is mentioned in 
the information, also the identity of the accused as the 
criminal. 
 
Proof beyond reasonable doubt - does not mean such 
a degree of proof, as excluding the possibility of error, 
produces absolute certainty. Moral certainty only is 
what is required or that degree of proof which 
produces conviction in an unprejudiced mind. It is not 
absolute certainty, only moral certainty that 
produces conviction in an unprejudiced mind. 
 
Equipoise rule 
Where the evidence in a criminal case is evenly 
balanced, the Constitutional presumption of innocence 
tilts the scales in favor of the accused (People v. 
Erguiza) 
 
The application of the rule is triggered by a situation 
where the court is faced with conflicting versions of 
the prosecution and the defense and where the 
evidence, facts and circumstances are capable of two 
or more explanation.  
1) One of which is consistent with the innocence 
of the accused and  
2) the other consistent with the guilt. 
 
The situation cannot fulfill the test of moral certainty, 
and is not sufficient to support a conviction. 
 
Right to be informed of the nature and cause of 
accusation  
1) arrested 
2) detained  
3) under custodial investigation 
4) preliminary investigation 
 
in the information or the complaint, it must be in an 
ordinary and concise language, not necessarily the 
language use in the statute, but in terms sufficient to 
enable a person of common understanding to know 
what offense is being charged, and the attending 
qualifying and aggravating circumstance present so that 
the accused can properly defend himself and the court 
can pronounce judgment. 
 
Purpose of the right:  

--- PAGE 90 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
90 
1) To furnish the accused with such description 
of the charges against him as will enable him to 
make his defense;  
2) To avail himself of his conviction or acquittal 
for the protection against a further prosecution 
for the same cause, to know know whether the 
double jeopardy has already set in;  
3) To inform the court of the facts alleged so that 
it may decide whether they are sufficient in law 
to support a conviction, if one should be had 
 
Effect of failure to state the elements of the crime 
charged  
May file a motion to quash the information, without 
prejudice to refiling 
 
Effect when aggravating, qualifying circumstances are 
not alleged in the complaint or information. One 
cannot convict or find an accused guilty of a crime, 
which is higher than what is only alleged in the 
complaint or information. 
An accused cannot be convicted of a higher offense 
than that with which he was charged in the complaint 
or information and on which he was tried (Canceran 
v. People)  
 
The Supreme Court explained that the only 
difference between ephedrine and 
methamphetamine is the presence of a single atom 
of oxygen in the former. The removal of the oxygen 
in the ephedrine will produce methamphetamine. 
With ephedrine containing 50% of 
methamphetamine hydrochloride, if the oxygen 
content in the former is removed then nearly half of 
the amount that was seized in the seized ephedrine 
contains 340 methamphetamine hydrochloride. In 
other words, his right to be informed of the 
charges against him has not been violated 
because when an accused is charged with a 
specific crime, he is duly informed not only of 
such specific crime, but also of lesser crimes or 
offenses included therein. (People v. Noque) 
 
Right to be present and defend in person and by 
counsel at every stage of the proceedings from 
arraignment to promulgation of the judgment. 
 
1) Arrested  
2) Detained 
3) Custodial investigation 
4) Arraignment 
5) Promulgation of the judgment 
 
If the court directs that the presence of the accused is 
imperative or that the accused must be present during 
a hearing date and then he is duly notified of the date 
and the time of the hearing, but without justifiable 
cause he does not appear. So long as this is already after 
the arraignment his absence after due notice shall be 
considered a waiver of his right to be present thereat. 
 
RULE 114, Section 2(c). Conditions of the bail; 
requirements. – The failure of the accused to appear 
at the trial without justification and despite due 
notice shall be deemed a waiver of his right to be 
present thereat. In such a case, the trial may proceed 
in absentia 
 
Another situation in Section 1(c) of Rule 115 is when 
the accused under custody escapes, he shall be deemed 
to have waived his right to be present on all subsequent 
trial dates until custody over him is regained. 
 
Upon motion, the accused may be allowed to defend 
himself in person when it sufficiently appears to the 
court that he can properly protect his rights without 
the assistance of counsel.  
 
This is one instance where the accused, one who is not 
an attorney, is allowed by the court to defend himself 
in person, but it should sufficient sufficiently appear to 
the court that he can properly protect his rights without 
the assistance of counsel. 
 
SUMMARY 
1) The accused has the right to be present in all 
the dates of his hearing and his trial. There 
are specific instances such as arraignment and 
plea during trial whenever necessary for his 
identification and the promulgation of his 
sentence 
2) When the court directs him to be present such 
if he does not appear, he waives his right to be 
present during that time; but the court has the 
right to go on with the proceedings in absentia. Now, 
he only waives his right to be present at that 
hearing. 
3) where the accused escaped from custody of 
law. The effect is that he loses his right to be 
present in all the subsequent trials until the 
custody over him is regained by the court 
 
RULE 116 
ARRAIGNMENT AND PLEA 
 
Section 1. Arraignment and plea; how made. — 
xxx 
(e) When the accused is under preventive 
detention, his case shall be raffled and its records 
transmitted to the judge to whom the case was 
raffled within three (3) days from the filing of the 
information or complaint. The accused shall be 
arraigned within ten (10) days from the date of the 
raffle. The pre-trial conference of his case shall be 
held within ten (10) days after arraignment. (n) 
 
(g) Unless a shorter period is provided by special law 
or Supreme Court circular, the arraignment shall be 
held within thirty (30) days from the date the court 
acquires jurisdiction over the person of the accused. 
The time of the pendency of a motion to quash 
or for a bill of particulars or other causes 
justifying suspension of the arraignment shall 

--- PAGE 91 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
91 
be excluded in computing the period. (sec. 2, cir. 
38-98) 
 
Rules of Procedure 
 
 
REVISED GUIDELINES ON CONTINUOS 
TRIAL OF CRIMINAL CASES 
III. Procedure  
Arraignment and Pre-trial  
a) Schedule of Arraignment and Pre-trial. - 
Once the court has acquired jurisdiction 
over the person of the accused, the 
arraignment of the accused and the pre-
trial shall be set within ten (10) calendar 
days from date of the court's receipt of the 
case for a detained accused, and within 
thirty (30) calendar days from the date the 
court acquires jurisdiction (either by arrest or 
voluntary surrender) over a non-detained 
accused, unless a shorter period is provided 
by special law or Supreme Court circular. 
 
The court must set the arraignment of the accused 
in the commitment order, in the case of detained 
accused, or in the order of approval of bail, in any 
other case. For this purpose, where the Executive 
Judge and Pairing Judges act on bail applications in 
cases assigned to other courts, they shall coordinate 
with the courts to which the cases are actually 
assigned for scheduling purposes. 
 
Revised guidelines 
  
 Detained Non-detained 
Revised rules The accused 
shall be 
arraigned 
within ten (10) 
days from the 
date of the 
raffle. The pre-
trial conference 
of his case shall 
be held within 
ten (10) days 
after 
arraignment. 
within thirty 
(30) calendar 
days from the 
date the court 
acquires 
jurisdiction 
Revised 
guidelines 
arraignment of 
the accused and 
the pre-trial 
shall be set 
within ten (10) 
calendar days 
from date of 
the court's 
receipt of the 
case for a 
detained 
accused 
 
Revised Rules Revised guidelines 
Rule 116 AM No 15-06-10 SC 
Separate arraignment 
and pre-trial for a 
detained accused 
Merged arraignment and 
pre-trial for a detained 
accused 
10 days 10 calendar days 
(including the weekends) 
Within 30 days (plea and pre-trial are on same day) 
 
MOTIONS 
Motions allowed 
 
REVISED GUIDELINES ON CONTINUOS 
TRIAL OF CRIMINAL CASES 
III. Procedure  
2) Motions  
(a) Motion for Inhibition – Motions for inhibition 
based on grounds provided for under Rule 137 shall 
be resolved immediately or within two (2) calendar 
days from date of their filing. 
 
Motions prohibited 
 
REVISED GUIDELINES ON CONTINUOS 
TRIAL OF CRIMINAL CASES 
(b) Prohibited Motions - Prohibited motions shall be 
denied outright before the scheduled arraignment 
without need of comment and/ or opposition.  
 
The following motions are prohibited:  
i. Motion for judicial determination of probable 
cause.  
ii. Motion for preliminary investigation filed beyond 
the five (5)-day reglementary period in inquest 
proceedings under Sec. 6, Rule 112, or when 
preliminary investigation is required under Sec. 8, 
Rule 112, or allowed in inquest proceedings and the 
accused failed to participate in the preliminary 
investigation despite due notice.  
iii. Motion for reinvestigation of the prosecutor 
recommending the filing of information once the 
information has been filed before the court  
(1) if the motion is filed without prior leave of court; 
(2) when preliminary investigation is not required 
under Sec. 8, Rule 112; and  
(3) when the regular preliminary investigation is 
required and has been actually conducted, and the 
grounds relied upon in the motion are not 
meritorious, such as issues of credibility, 
admissibility of evidence, innocence of the accused, 
or lack of due process when the accused was actually 
notified, among others.  
iv. Motion to quash information when the ground is 
not one of those stated in Sec. 3, Rule 117.  
v. Motion for bill of particulars that does not 
conform to Sec. 9, Rule 116. 
vi. Motion to suspend the arraignment based on 
grounds not stated under Sec. 11, Rule 116.  
vii. Petition to suspend the criminal action on the 
ground of prejudicial question, when no civil case 
has been filed, pursuant to Sec. 7, Rule 111. 
 
EFFECT: it can be dismissed outright by the 
Court handling the case, period must be complied 
with 


--- PAGE 92 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
92 
 
v. Motion for bill of particulars that does not 
conform to Sec. 9, Rule 116. 
Section 9. Bill of particulars. — The accused may, 
before arraignment, move for a bill of particulars to 
enable him properly to plead and to prepare for trial. 
The motion shall specify the alleged defects of the 
complaint or information and the details desired. 
(10a) 
 
Bill of particulars - Pleading which provides for a 
more definite statement of the allegations of complaint 
or information found to be vague and ambiguous to 
enable the accused to properly plead and prepare for 
trial. 
 
 Must be those material information or element 
of the crime being charged 
 The question being resolved in a bill of 
particulars are whether or not the complaint or 
information are averred with sufficient 
particularity to enable the party to give a 
responsive pleading or prepare for trial. 
 The allowance for the motion of bill of 
particulars is discretionary on the part of the 
court 
 Either by filing an amended complaint or 
information or filing a responsive pleading 
which the accused sought to be clarified 
 May be a prohibited pleading if it does not 
conform with sec 9 
 
vi. Motion to suspend the arraignment based on 
grounds not stated under Sec. 11, Rule 116.  
Section 11. Suspension of arraignment. — Upon motion 
by the proper party, the arraignment shall be 
suspended in the following cases: 
 
(a) The accused appears to be suffering from an 
unsound mental condition which effective 
renders him unable to fully understand the charge 
against him and to plead intelligently thereto. In such 
case, the court shall order his mental examination 
and, if necessary, his confinement for such purpose; 
 Until the cessation of the condition and 
recovers his full mental faculty 
 Test for competency to stand trial 
1) Whether the defendant is sufficiently 
coherent in providing the counsel with 
information to construct a defense 
2) whether he is able to comprehend the 
significance of the trial  
(b) There exists a prejudicial question; and 
 Until termination or suspension of civil 
action 
(c) A petition for review of the resolution of the 
prosecutor is pending at either the Department of 
Justice, or the Office of the President; provided, that 
the period of suspension shall not exceed sixty (60) 
days counted from the filing of the petition with the 
reviewing office. (12a) 
 Shall not exceed 60 days 
 Court has to independently assess if there is 
reason to continue despite the resolution of 
DOJ and OP 
 
vii. Petition to suspend the criminal action on the 
ground of prejudicial question, when no civil case 
has been filed, pursuant to Sec. 7, Rule 111. 
 In case there is no civil action filed, there can 
be no prejudicial question 
 
Meritorious motions 
(c) Meritorious Motions. - Motions that allege plausible 
grounds supported by relevant documents and/ or 
competent evidence, except those that are already 
covered by the Revised Guidelines, are meritorious 
motions, such as:  
i. Motion to withdraw information, or to downgrade 
the charge in the original information, or to exclude 
an accused originally charged therein, filed by the 
prosecution as a result of a reinvestigation, 
reconsideration, and review;  
ii. Motion to quash warrant of arrest;  
iii. Motion to suspend arraignment on the ground of 
an unsound mental condition under Sec. 11(a), Rule 
116;  
iv. Motion to suspend proceedings on the ground of 
a prejudicial question where a civil case was filed 
prior to the criminal case under Sec. ll(b), Rule 116;  
v. Motion to quash information on the grounds that 
the facts charged do not constitute an offense, lack 
of jurisdiction, extinction of criminal action or 
liability, or double jeopardy under Sec. 3, par. (a), (b), 
(g), and (i), Rule 117;  
vi. Motion to discharge accused as a state witness 
under Sec. 17, Rule 119;  
vii. Motion to quash search warrant under Sec. 14, 
Rule 126 or motion to suppress evidence; and  
viii. Motion to discuss on the ground that the 
criminal case is a Strategic Lawsuit Against Public 
Participation (SLAPP) under Rule 6 of the Rules of 
Procedure for Environmental Cases.  
 
(d) Motion for postponement. -A motion for 
postponement is prohibited, except if it is based 
on acts of God, force majeure or physical 
inability of the witness to appear and testify. If 
the motion is granted based on such exceptions, the 
moving party shall be warned that the presentation 
of its evidence must still be finished on the dates 
previously agreed upon. A motion for 
postponement, whether written or oral, shall at all 
times be accompanied by the original official receipt 
from the Office of the Clerk of Court evidencing 
payment of the postponement fee under Sec. 21 (b), 
Rule 141, to be submitted either at the time of the 
filing of said 1notion or not later than the next 
hearing date. The Clerk of Court shall not accept the 
motion unless accompanied by the original receipt. 
 
EFFECT: suspend the arraignment and pre-trial 
because the Court has to resolve; will toll the 
running of the period 
 
Section 1. Arraignment and plea; how made. — 

--- PAGE 93 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
93 
 
(a) The accused must be arraigned before the court 
where the complaint or information was filed or 
assigned for trial. The arraignment shall be made in 
open court by the judge or clerk by furnishing the 
accused with a copy of the complaint or information, 
reading the same in the language or dialect known to 
him, and asking him whether he pleads guilty or not 
guilty. The prosecution may call at the trial witnesses 
other than those named in the complaint or 
information. 
(b) The accused must be present at the arraignment 
and must personally enter his plea. Both arraignment 
and plea shall be made of record, but failure to do so 
shall not affect the validity of the proceedings. 
(c) When the accused refuses to plead or makes a 
conditional plea, a plea of not guilty shall be entered 
for him. (1a) 
(d) When the accused pleads guilty but presents 
exculpatory evidence, his plea shall be deemed 
withdrawn and a plea of not guilty shall be entered 
for him. (n) 
(e) When the accused is under preventive detention, 
his case shall be raffled and its records transmitted 
to the judge to whom the case was raffled within 
three (3) days from the filing of the information or 
complaint. The accused shall be arraigned within ten 
(10) days from the date of the raffle. The pre-trial 
conference of his case shall be held within ten (10) 
days after arraignment. (n) 
(f) The private offended party shall be required to 
appear at the arraignment for purposes of plea 
bargaining, determination of civil liability, and other 
matters requiring his presence. In case of failure of 
the offended party to appear despite due notice, the 
court may allow the accused to enter a plea of guilty 
to a lesser offense which is necessarily included in 
the offense charged with the conformity of the trial 
prosecutor alone. (cir. 1-89) 
(g) Unless a shorter period is provided by special law 
or Supreme Court circular, the arraignment shall be 
held within thirty (30) days from the date the court 
acquires jurisdiction over the person of the accused. 
The time of the pendency of a motion to quash or 
for a bill of particulars or other causes justifying 
suspension of the arraignment shall be excluded in 
computing the period. (sec. 2, cir. 38-98) 
 
Arraignment – a procedure whereby the accused is 
brought before the court to plead to the criminal 
charge in the indictment or information. The charge is 
read to him and he asked to plead “guilty” or “not 
guilty” or where permitted, “nolo contendere”. 
(Black’s Law Dictionary) 
 
Arraignment is the formal mode and manner of 
implementing the constitutional right of an accused to 
be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation 
against him. Its purpose is to apprise the accused why 
he is being prosecuted by the State. As such, it is an 
indispensable require of due process and thus, cannot 
be regarded lightly or brushed aside peremptorily 
(Taglay v. Daray) 
 
Characteristics 
 a precondition for the court’s acquisition of 
jurisdiction over the person of the accused to 
try and to decide his case. 
 partakes the nature of an answer as in a civil 
case through which the issues of the case are 
joined and the court acquires jurisdiction to 
decide over the issues 
 prior arraignment of the accused is 
indispensable in a trial in absentia 
 if there is no arraignment or was improperly 
conducted, the proceedings that happen 
thereafter will be null and void  
 
Q: What is the basis of arraignment? 
A: Arraignment is the formal mode and manner of 
implementing the constitutional right of an accused to 
be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation 
against him. 
 
Q: What is the purpose of arraignment? 
A: The purpose of arraignment is to apprise the 
accused of the possible loss of freedom, even of his 
life, depending on the nature of the crime imputed to 
him. 
 
Q: What is the nature of arraignment? 
A: As an indispensable requirement of due process, 
arraignment cannot be regarded lightly or brushed 
aside peremptorily.  
 
Remedies before arraignment 
1) Motion to conduct preliminary investigation 
2) Motion to withdraw complaint or information 
3) Arrest with warrant, motion to quash warrant 
of arrest 
4) Bail/ Petition for bail/Motion for reduction of 
bail/recognizance 
5) Motion for bill of particulars 
6) Motion to suspend arraignment 
7) Motion to dismiss in case of strategic lawsuit 
against public participation 
8) Dismissal of the case before arraignment under 
the Rules on Summary Procedure 
9) Diversion in case of Children in Conflict with 
the law 
 
Duty of court to inform accused of his right to 
counsel 
Section 6. Duty of court to inform accused of his right to 
counsel. — Before arraignment, the court shall inform 
the accused of his right to counsel and ask him if he 
desires to have one. Unless the accused is allowed to 
defend himself in person or has employed a counsel 
of his choice, the court must assign a counsel de 
oficio to defend him. (6a) 
 
Four-fold pre-arraignment duties of the judge 
1)  To inform the accused that he has the right 
to have his own counsel before being 
arraigned;  

--- PAGE 94 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
94 
2) After giving such information, to ask accused 
whether he desires the aid of counsel;  
3) If he so desires to procure the services of 
counsel, the court must grant him 
reasonable time to do so; and  
4) If he so desires to have counsel but is unable to 
employ one, the court must assign a counsel 
de oficio to defend him. ( People v. 
Agbayani, 1998, En Banc). 
 
Section 7. Appointment of counsel de oficio. — The 
court, considering the gravity of the offense and the 
difficulty of the questions that may arise, shall 
appoint as counsel de oficio only such members of 
the bar in good standing who, by reason of their 
experience and ability, can competently defend the 
accused. But in localities where such members of the 
bar are not available, the court may appoint any 
person, resident of the province and of good repute 
for probity and ability, to defend the accused. (7a) 
 
GR: The court, considering the gravity of the offense 
and the difficulty of the questions that may arise, shall 
appoint as counsel de oficio only such members of the 
bar in good standing who, by reason of their experience 
and ability, can competently defend the accused. 
XPN: In localities where such members of the bar are 
not available, the court may appoint any person, 
resident of the province and of good repute for probity 
and ability, to defend the accused (not necessarily a 
lawyer) 
 
Section 8. Time for counsel de oficio to prepare for 
arraignment. — Whenever a counsel de oficio is 
appointed by the court to defend the accused at the 
arraignment, he shall be given a reasonable time to 
consult with the accused as to his plea before 
proceeding with the arraignment. (8) 
 
Plea – is the formal answer of the defendant in 
common law pleading. The answer of “guilty” or “not 
guilty” in an arraignment for a criminal charge.  
 
It is the response made by the accused in open court 
upon arraignment upon which the information is read 
to him in a language or dialect known to him and such 
accused is asked whether he pleads guilty or not to the 
offense charged. 
 
1) Plea of guilty 
2) Plea of not guilty 
 
Plea of guilty 
It is where the accused admits his guilt voluntarily and 
admits the consequences of his act and with a clear 
understanding of the precise nature of the crime 
charged in the complaint or information. It is absolute 
and unconditional. 
 
Plea of not guilty 
Where the accused denies his guilt or admits some of 
the allegations of the complaint or information but sets 
up a new and additional fact which if proven will 
exempt him or relieve him in whole or in part of the 
criminal responsibility that would attach of proof guilt. 
 
Instances where a plea of NOT guilty is entered 
1) When he pleads not guilty to the offense 
charged 
2) When the accused refuses to plead; or  
3) When the accused makes a conditional plea. 
4) When he admits some or all of the acts in the 
information but interposes additional facts 
where if duly proven would exempt him in 
whole or in part of criminal responsibility 
5) When after a plea of guilt he presents 
evidence of self defense and other 
exculpatory evidence 
6) When the plea made by the accused is 
indefinite, vague, ambiguous 
 
What objections are deemed waived if not raised 
prior to the accused arraignment and plea? 
1) That the Information does not conform 
substantially to the prescribed form, and all 
possible objections to the sufficiency of the 
Information against him; 
2) Duplicity/multiplicity of charges in the 
Information in violation of Section 13, Rule 
110; 
3) Defects in the manner of the accused’s 
arrest;’ 
4) The illegality of the accused’s arrest; and 
5) Violation of the rights to Preliminary 
Investigation. 
 
Remedies before enter of plea 
1) Amendment of the complaint or information 
2) Motion to quash complaint or information 
3) Posting of bail/petition for bail 
 
Rearraignment of the accused is proper 
1) Accused is deaf-mute, retard whose mental 
age is only 7 years old and nine months with 
a low IQ with only 8  
2) Trial court failed to explain fully to the 
accused of the consequence of his plea of 
guilt and the probable imposable penalty 
upon him  
3) Where the information was amended and the 
accused plead on the original information 
the action of the trial court was held proper 
 
Amended information 
GR: When the complaint or information has been 
amended, the accused shall be arraigned on the 
amended information.  
XPN: But in cases where the amendment was only as 
to matters in form, he need not be rearraigned once he 
has already pleaded in the original information. 
 
Form – no rearraignment 
Substantial – rearraignment  

--- PAGE 95 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
95 
 
Substituted information 
Must plead on the new information 
 
May an arraignment be made after the case has 
been submitted for decision? 
YES.  
 
His arrest and not his arraignment conferred 
jurisdiction. The procedural defect was cured when 
his counsel participated in the trial without facing 
any objection that his client is yet to be arraigned. 
The counsel’s active participation of the hearing is a 
clear indication that he is fully aware of the charges 
against him (People v. Pangilinan) 
 
Grounds of objection waived after pleading  
1) Sufficiency of the information;  
2) Failure of the information to allege time with 
sufficient definiteness; 
3) Multiplicity of charges – may be made during 
trial; 
4) Defects of the manner of arrest 
5) Irregularity of arrest  
6) Violation of preliminary investigation 
7) Violation against the constitutional right 
against unreasonable searches and seizures. 
 
Plea as not a waiver in the following cases 
1) Filed a demurrer to evidence and objected to 
the formal offer of evidence  
2) Plea and active participation of trial  
3) Consistent invoking of regular preliminary 
investigation 
 
Section 2. Plea of guilty to a lesser offense. — At 
arraignment, the accused, with the consent of the 
offended party and the prosecutor, may be allowed 
by the trial court to plead guilty to a lesser offense 
which is necessarily included in the offense charged. 
After arraignment but before trial, the accused 
may still be allowed to plead guilty to said lesser 
offense after withdrawing his plea of not guilty. No 
amendment of the complaint or information is 
necessary. (sec. 4, circ. 38-98) 
 
A lesser offense is necessarily included in the 
offense charged when the essential ingredients of the 
later constitute or form part of those constituting the 
latter. Thus, the crime of homicide is necessarily 
included in murder or theft is necessarily included in 
robbery.  
 
What facts and circumstances are necessary to be 
included therein must be determined by reference 
to the definitions and essentials of the specified 
crimes. The requirement of alleging the elements of a 
crime in the information is to inform the accused of 
the nature of the accusation against him so as to enable 
him to suitably prepare his defense. (Canceran v. 
People) 
 
Not allowed as a matter of bargaining or 
compromise, but may be availableonly if 
1) The prosecutor has no sufficient evidence 
2) The court will approve or disapprove 
3) Not demandable as a matter of right 
 
When and whose consent are necessary 
1) At arraignment – offended party and 
prosecutor 
2) Failed to appear in arraignment despite 
due notice – trial prosecutor alone 
3) After arraignment but before trial 
4) After prosecution already presented 
evidences 
 
Effect to civil liability 
The civil liability may still be awarded. 
 
Section 3. Plea of guilty to capital offense; reception of 
evidence. — When the accused pleads guilty to a 
capital offense, the court shall conduct a searching 
inquiry into the voluntariness and full 
comprehension of the consequences of his plea and 
require the prosecution to prove his guilt and the 
precise degree of culpability. The accused may 
present evidence in his behalf. (3a) 
 
Rationale 
The courts must proceed with greatest caution. To 
avoid improvident pleads of guilt on the part of the 
accused where grave crimes are involved since he 
might be admitting his guilt in the court. 
 
The court shall:  
1) Conduct a searching inquiry into the 
voluntariness and full comprehension of the 
consequences of his plea; and  
2) Require the prosecution to prove his guilt 
and the precise degree of culpability 
3. Ask the accused if he desires to present 
evidence in his behalf. 
 
Searching inquiry 
The court provided herein the guidelines:  
a) Ascertain from the accused himself (a) how 
he was brought into the custody of the law; 
(b) whether he had the assistance of a 
competent counsel during the custodial and 
preliminary investigations; and (c) under what 
conditions he was detained and 
interrogated during the investigations.  
b) Ask the defense counsel a series of questions 
as to whether he had conferred with, and 
completely explained to, the accused the 
meaning and consequences of a plea of 
guilty.  
c) Elicit information about the personality 
profile of the accused, such as his age, socio-
economic status, and educational background, 
which may serve as a trustworthy index of his 
capacity to give a free and informed plea of 
guilty.  

--- PAGE 96 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
96 
d) Inform the accused of the exact length of 
imprisonment or nature of the penalty under 
the law and the certainty that he will serve such 
sentence.  
e) Inquire if the accused knows the crime with 
which he is charged and to fully explain to 
him the elements of the crime which the basis 
of his indictment is.  
f) All questions posed to the accused should be in 
a language known and understood by the 
latter. 
g) The trial judge must satisfy himself that the 
accused, in pleading guilty, is truly guilty. The 
accused must be required to narrate the 
tragedy or reenact the crime or furnish its 
missing details. (People v. Tonyacao) 
 
Proof of aggravating circumstances 
Must also be explained the aggravating circumstances 
when he pleads guilty imputed against him. Where the 
aggravating circumstances listed in the information are 
not supported by the evidence adduced a plea of not 
guilty to a capital offense cannot constitute an 
admission of the aggravating circumstances set forth in 
the information.  
 
Plea of guilty cannot constitute an admission on the 
aggravating circumstances set forth in the information. 
 
People vs. Apduhan, Jr. cited by some of the cases relied 
upon by the lower court, declared that — 
 
While an unqualified plea of guilty is mitigating, it at 
the same time constitutes an admission of all material 
facts alleged in the information, including the 
aggravating circumstance therein recited, x x x The 
prosecution does not need to prove the three 
aggravating circumstances (all alleged in the second 
amended information) since the accused, by his plea of 
guilty, has supplied the requisite proof. 
 
Section 4. Plea of guilty to non-capital offense; reception of 
evidence, discretionary. — When the accused pleads 
guilty to a non-capital offense, the court may receive 
evidence from the parties to determine the penalty 
to be imposed. (4) 
 
Plea of Guilty to Non-Capital Offenses Effect 
The court may receive evidence from the parties. 
Reception of evidence is discretionary on the part of 
the court in contrast with a plea of guilt to a capital 
offense. 
 
Plea on capital 
offenses 
Plea on non-capital 
offenses 
Reception of evidence is 
mandatory. 
Reception of evidence is 
discretionary 
Hearing is mandatory Hearing is discretionary 
 
Section 5. Withdrawal of improvident plea of guilty. — At 
any time before the judgment of conviction becomes 
final, the court may permit an improvident plea of 
guilty to be withdrawn and be substituted by a plea 
of not guilty. (5) 
 
Improvident plea - It is usually a plea that is 
involuntarily made and without consent. A plea is 
usually considered improvident when there was failure 
to conduct searching inquiry, failure of prosecution to 
present evidence or no rational basis between the 
testimony and of the guilt. 
 
It is a plea without information as to all the 
circumstances affecting it. It is based upon a mistaken 
assumption or misleading information or advice. 
(Black Law’s Dictionary) 
 
The accused can confess guilt at any time even after 
arraignment or trial must begin but the law is clear that 
he shall not thereby entitled into such plea as 
considered as mitigating. 
 
Instances of improvident plea 
1) Plea of guilty compelled by violence or 
intimidation 
2) The accused did not fully understand the 
meaning and consequences of his plea 
3) Insufficient information to sustain 
conviction of the offense charged 
4) Information does not charge an offense 
5) Court has no jurisdiction 
 
Period to withdraw an improvident plea 
The court may permit an improvident plea of guilty to 
be withdrawn, at any time before the judgment of 
conviction becomes final and be substituted by a plea 
of not guilty. (Sec 5, Rule 116) 
 
Nature of an improvident plea 
The withdrawal of a plea of guilty at any time before 
judgment is not a matter of strict right to the 
accused but of sound discretion to the trial court. 
(Sec 5, Rule 116; People v. Lambino) 
 
Section 10. Production or inspection of material evidence in 
possession of prosecution. — Upon motion of the 
accused showing good cause and with notice to the 
parties, the court, in order to prevent surprise, 
suppression, or alteration, may order the 
prosecution to produce and permit the inspection 
and copying or photographing of any written 
statement given by the complainant and other 
witnesses in any investigation of the offense 
conducted by the prosecution or other investigating 
officers, as well as any designated documents, 
papers, books, accounts, letters, photographs, 
objects or tangible things not otherwise privileged, 
which constitute or contain evidence material to any 
matter involved in the case and which are in the 
possession or under the control of the prosecution, 
police, or other law investigating agencies. (11a) 
 
 Mode of discovery which is available only to 
the accused  

--- PAGE 97 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
97 
 Leave of court is required for this particular 
mode of discovery  
 This is part of the right of accused to 
compulsory process in his behalf 
 
Requisites 
1) The accused must file a motion showing good 
cause; 
2) The documents must be in the possession of 
the prosecution, police, or other law 
investigating agencies. 
3) The documents must constitute evidence 
material to the case 
 
RULE 118 
PRE -TRIAL 
 
Section 1. Pre-trial; mandatory in criminal cases. — In all 
criminal cases cognizable by the Sandiganbayan, 
Regional Trial Court, Metropolitan Trial Court, 
Municipal Trial Court in Cities, Municipal Trial 
Court and Municipal Circuit Trial Court, the 
court shall after arraignment and within thirty (30) 
days from the date the court acquires 
jurisdiction over the person of the accused, unless 
a shorter period is provided for in special laws or 
circulars of the Supreme Court, order a pre-trial 
conference to consider the following: 
 
(a) plea bargaining; 
(b) stipulation of facts; 
(c) marking for identification of evidence of the 
parties; 
(d) waiver of objections to admissibility of evidence; 
(e) modification of the order of trial if the accused 
admits the charge but interposes a lawful defense; 
and 
(f) such other matters as will promote a fair and 
expeditious trial of the criminal and civil aspects of 
the case. (secs. 2 and 3, cir. 38-98) 
 
Pre-trial - is a procedural device intended to clarify and 
limit the basic issues between the parties and to take 
the trial of cases out of the realm of surprise and 
maneuvering. It thus paves the way for a less cluttered 
trial and resolution of the case. (LCK Industries v. 
Planters Development Bank) 
 
Period  
Within the same day of the arraignment and plea 
(Revised Guidelines for Continuous Trial of 
Criminal Cases) 
 
Pre-trial conference - is used as a device to narrow 
down issues to be tried, to secure stipulations as to 
matters and stipulations to be heard and to take all 
other steps necessary to aid the disposition of the case. 
 
Matters to be considered during pre-trial 
(a) plea bargaining; 
Definition 
It is the process whereby the accused, the offended 
party and the prosecution work out a mutually 
satisfactory disposition of the case subject to court 
approval. It usually involves the defendant’s pleading 
guilty to a lesser offense or to only one or some of the 
counts of a multi-count indictment in return for a 
lighter sentence than that for the graver charge. In this 
jurisdiction, plea bargaining has been defined as "a 
process whereby the accused and the prosecution work 
out a mutually satisfactory disposition of the case 
subject to court approval.” (Estipona Jr. v. Lobrigo) 
Effect of void plea bargaining 
Void ab initio 
 
(b) stipulation of facts; 
 Sanctioned by law; in further pursuit of 
expediting trial 
 Effect: considered as judicial admissions 
which will be binding upon the parties 
 it will result to a waiver of their right to 
present evidence of the facts stipulated 
 age cannot be a stipulation of fact 
 In order for the accused to be bound, it must 
be signed by him 
Stipulation of facts 
during pre-trial 
Stipulation of facts 
during trial proper 
Reduced in writing and 
must be signed by the 
accused and counsel 
Automatically reduced in 
writing and is contained 
in the transcript of the 
proceeding 
 Consent or signature of 
the accused is  
unnecessary in view of 
the fact that an attorney 
is employed to manage 
the party’s conduct to a 
lawsuit 
 
(c) marking for identification of evidence of the parties; 
 what is specified are the possible evidence 
which may be presented during the trial 
 No evidence shall be allowed to be presented 
and offered during the trial other than those 
identified and marked during the pre-trial 
except when allowed by the court for good 
cause shown. (I-B [2], AM No. 03-1-09-SC) 
(d) waiver of objections to admissibility of evidence; 
(e) modification of the order of trial if the accused 
admits the charge but interposes a lawful defense; and 
 Reverse trial order 
(f) such other matters as will promote a fair and 
expeditious trial of the criminal and civil aspects of the 
case. 
 If the accused has pleaded not guilty to the 
crime charged, he may state whether he 
interposes a negative or affirmative defense. 
A negative defense shall require the 
prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused 
beyond reasonable doubt, while an 
affirmative defense may modify the order of 
trial and require the accused to prove such 

--- PAGE 98 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
98 
defense by clear and convincing evidence. (Sec 
3, RA 8493 or the Speedy Trial Act) 
 Negative - require the prosecution to prove 
the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable 
doubt 
Affirmative - modify the order of trial and 
require the accused to prove such defense by 
clear and convincing evidence 
 
Section 2. Pre-trial agreement. — All agreements or 
admissions made or entered during the pre-trial 
conference shall be reduced in writing and signed 
by the accused and counsel, otherwise, they 
cannot be used against the accused. The agreements 
covering the matters referred to in section 1 of this 
Rule shall be approved by the court. (sec. 4, cir. 38-
98) 
 
Pre-trial agreement 
To safeguard the accused in unauthorized agreements 
which his counsel may have entered into without his 
knowledge as he may waived his presence in the pre-
trial conference. There is necessity to affixed the 
signature. The rule is mandatory. 
 
Pre-trial agreement as evidence 
1) It is reduced in writing 
2) Signed by the accused and his counsel 
 
Approval of court 
The agreements in relation to matters referred to in 
Sec. 1, Rule 118 are subject to the approval of the 
court. ( Sec 2, Rule 118) Provided, that the 
agreement on the plea of the accused to a 
lesser offense may only be revised, modified, 
or annulled by the court when the same is 
contrary to law, public morals, or public policy. 
(Sec 3, RA 8493 or the Speedy Trial Act) 
 
Effect 
If the accused has not signed the pre-trial 
conference, the admission therein cannot be used 
against him. 
 
In this case, while it appears that the pre-trial 
agreement was signed only by the prosecution 
and defense counsel, the same may nevertheless 
be admitted given that the defense failed to 
object to its admission. (People v. Likiran) 
 
Section 3. Non-appearance at pre-trial conference. — If 
the counsel for the accused or the prosecutor does 
not appear at the pre-trial conference and does 
not offer an acceptable excuse for his lack of 
cooperation, the court may impose proper 
sanctions or penalties. (se. 5, cir. 38-98) 
 
Non-appearance of the counsel 
Counsel may be held in contempt (Sec 1, Rule 77) 
 
Non-appearance of the accused  
 If the accused is on bail and does not appear at 
the pre-trial as required by the court, the court 
may cancel the bail  
 If under the custody of the law and the jail 
warden fails to present the accused the court 
may impose a penalty on the jail warden 
 
Non-appearance of the private offended party 
 Appearance of the private offended party is not 
required by the court  
 Presence is required at the plea-bargaining, 
determination of civil liability and matters 
requiring his presence 
 
Duties of clerk of court 
During the preliminary conference, the branch clerk of 
court shall:  
1) Assist the parties in reaching a settlement of 
the civil aspect of the case;  
2) Mark the documents to be presented as 
exhibits and copies thereof attached to the 
records after comparison;  
3) Ascertain from the parties the undisputed facts 
and admissions on the genuineness and due 
execution of documents marked as exhibits; 
and  
4) Consider such other matters as may aid in the 
prompt disposition of the case. (A.M. No. 03-
1-09-SC) 
 
The proceedings during the preliminary conference 
shall be recorded in the minutes of preliminary 
conference to be signed by both parties and counsel. 
(A.M. No. 03-1-09-SC) 
 
Duty of the judge before pre-trial conference  
The judge before pre-trial conference must study the 
following:  
1) Allegations of the information;  
2) Statements in the affidavits of witnesses; and  
3) Other documents which form part of the 
record of the preliminary investigation. (A.M. 
No. 03-1-09-SC) 
 
Duty of the judge when plea bargaining is agreed 
upon  
During the pre-trial, the trial judge shall consider plea-
bargaining arrangements, except in cases for violations 
of the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act 
regardless of the imposable penalty. (Sec 23, RA 9165) 
 
Duty of the judge when plea bargaining fails 
1) Adopt the minutes of preliminary 
conference as part of the pre-trial 
proceedings, confirm markings of exhibits or 
substituted photocopies and admissions on the 
genuineness and due execution of documents 
and list object and testimonial evidence; 
2) Scrutinize every allegation of the 
information and the statements in the 
affidavits and other documents which form 

--- PAGE 99 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
99 
part of the record of the preliminary 
investigation and other documents identified 
and marked as exhibits in determining further 
admissions of facts, documents and in 
particular as to the following: 
 The identity of the accused; 
 Court’s territorial jurisdiction relative to 
the offense/s charged;  
 Qualification of expert witness;  
 Amount of damages;  
 Genuineness and due execution of 
documents;  
 The cause of death or injury, in proper 
cases;  
 Adoption of any evidence presented during 
the preliminary investigation;  
 Disclosure of defenses of alibi, insanity, 
self-defense, exercise of public authority 
and justifying or exempting circumstances; 
and  
 Such other matters that would limit the 
facts in issue. 
3) Define factual and legal issues;  
4) Ask parties to agree on the specific trial 
dates and adhere to the flow chart 
determined by the court which shall contain 
the time frames for the different stages of the 
proceeding up to promulgation of decision and 
use the time frame for each stage in setting the 
trial dates;  
5) Require the parties to submit to the Branch 
COC the names, addresses and contact 
numbers of witnesses that need to be 
summoned by subpoena; and  
6) Consider modification of order of trial if the 
accused admits the charge but interposes a 
lawful defense. (A.M. No. 03-1- 09-SC) 
 
Section 4. Pre-trial order. — After the pre-trial 
conference, the court shall issue an order reciting the 
actions taken, the facts stipulated, and evidence 
marked. Such order shall bind the parties, limit the 
trial to matters not disposed of, and control the 
course of the action during the trial, unless modified 
by the court to prevent manifest injustice. (3) 
 
Pre-trial order 
It is an order issued by the court reciting the actions 
taken, the facts stipulated, and the evidence marked 
during the pre-trial conference. (Sec 4, Rule 118) 
 
Period for the trial judge to issue a pre-trial order 
and its contents  
It must be issued within 10 days after the termination 
of the pre-trial. It shall set forth the following:  
1) Actions taken during the pre-trial conference;  
2) Facts stipulated;  
3) Admissions made;  
4) Evidence marked; and  
5) Number of witnesses to be presented and the 
schedule of trial. (Sec 4, Rule 118) 
 
Waiver 
Failure to object to the introduction of evidence on an 
issue not contained in a pre-trial order – IMPLIED 
CONSENT 
 
PART III REVISED GUIDELINES ON 
CONTINUOUS TRIALS FOR CRIMINAL 
CASES 
8(C) Waiver of Reading of the Information. - In 
multiple cases, the court, upon personal examination 
of the accused, may allow a waiver of the reading of the 
information upon the full understanding and express 
consent of the accused and his/her counsel, which 
consent shall be expressly stated in both the minutes/ 
certificate of arraignment and the order of arraignment. 
The court shall explain the waiver to the accused in the 
language or dialect known to him/her, and ensure the 
accused's full understanding of the consequences of 
the waiver before approving the same.  
 
(d) Arraignment Proper 
i. Plea Bargaining Except in Drug Cases. - If the accused 
desires to enter a plea of guilty to a lesser offense, 
plea bargaining shall immediately proceed, 
provided the private offended party in private crimes, 
or the arresting officer in victimless crimes, is present 
to give his/her consent with the conformity of the 
public prosecutor to the plea bargaining. Thereafter, 
judgment shall be immediately rendered in the same 
proceedings. 
ii. Plea of Guilty to the Crime Charged in the Information. - If 
the accused pleads guilty to the crime charged in 
the information, judgment shall be immediately 
rendered, except in those cases involving capital 
punishment 
*non capital – hearing is discretionary 
iii. Where No Plea Bargaining or Plea of Guilty Takes Place. 
- If the accused does not enter a plea of guilty, 
whether to a lesser offense or to the offense charged in 
the information, the court shall immediately 
proceed with the arraignment and the pretrial, in 
accordance with the succeeding provisions on pre-
trial. The schedule of the trial dates, for both the 
prosecution and the accused, shall be continuous and 
within the periods provided in the Regular Rules/ 
Special Rules. The trial dates may be shortened 
depending on the number of witnesses to be presented. 
In this regard, a flowchart shall be prepared by the 
court which shall serve as the final schedule of 
hearings. 
 

--- PAGE 100 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
100 
  
  
(e) Arraignment and Preliminary Conference of 
Mediatable Cases subject to the Rule on Summary 
Procedure  
The arraignment and preliminary conference shall 
be simultaneously held, and the court shall take up 
all the matters required under Sec. 14, Rule on 
Summary Procedure during the preliminary 
conference.  
i. If the accused pleads guilty to the crime charged 
in the information, subheading III, item no. 8, 
subparagraph ( d) ii. (Plea of Guilty to the Crime 
Charged In the Information) shall be followed.  
ii. If the accused pleads guilty to a lesser offense, 
subheading III, item no. 8, subparagraph (d) 1 (Plea 
Bargaining except in Drug Cases) shall be followed.  
iii. If the accused does not enter a plea of guilty, 
whether to a lesser offense or to the offense 
charged in the information, the court shall 
immediately proceed with the arraignment and the 
preliminary conference, and thereafter refer the case 
to mediation. 
 
9 Mediation (only civil aspect is discussed) 
(a) The fallowing cases shall be referred to mediation 
on the civil liability unless a settlement is reached earlier 
in the pre-trial/ preliminary conference:  
i. Crimes where payment may prevent criminal 
prosecution or ani extinguish criminal liability, 
such as violations of:  
a. B.P. Blg. 22; 
 b. SSS Law (R.A. No. 1161, as amended by R.A No. 
8282); and  
c. PAG-IBIG Law (R.A. No. 9679).  
 
ii. Crimes against property under Title 10 of the 
Revised Penal Code (RPC), where the obligation 
may be civil in nature, such as:  
a. Theft under Art. 308, RPC, cognizable by the first 
level courts;  
b. Estafa under Art. 315(1), RPC, except estafa under 
Art. 315 (2) and (3);  
c. Other forms of swindling under Art. 316, RPC;  
d. Swindling of a minor under Art. 317, RPC;  
e. Other deceits under Art. 318, RPC; and  
f. Malicious mischief under Art. 327, RPC.  
 
Crimes against honor under Title 13, RPC, where 
the liability may be civil in nature, such as:  
a. Libel by means of writings or similar means under 
Art. 355, RPC;  
b. Threatening to publish and offer to present such 
publication for a compensation under Art. 356, RPC;  
c. Prohibited publication of acts referred to in the 
course of official proceedings under Art. 357, RPC;  
d. Grave Slander (Grave Oral Defamation) of serious 
and insulting nature under Art. 358, par. 1, RPC;  
e. Simple Slander (Oral Defamation) - not of a serious 
and insulting nature under Art. 358, par. 2, RPC;  
f. Grave Slander by Deed - of a serious nature under 
Art. 359, par. 1, RPC;  
g. Simple Slander by Deed - not of a serious nature 
under Art. 359, par. 2, RPC;  
h. Incriminating innocent person under Art. 363, RPC; 
L Intriguing against honor under Art. 364, RPC;  
i. Libel under R.A. 10175 (Cybercrime Prevention Act 
of 2012) where the liability may be civil in nature;  
j. Criminal negligence under Title 14, RPC, where the 
liability may be civil in nature; and  
k. Intellectual property rights cases where the liability 
may be civil in nature.  
 
(b) The referral of the case for mediation to the 
Philippine Mediation Center (PMC) Unit shall be 
made only after the conduct of the arraignment 
and the pre-frial/ preliminary conference. The 
court shall serve the Order of Referral to the PMC 
Unit immediately after the arraignment and the 
pre-trial / preliminary conference.  
 
The mediation shall be terminated within a non-
extendible period of thirty (30) calendar days from 
the date of referral by the court to the PMC Unit. 
After the lapse of the mediation period or if mediation 
fails, trial shall proceed. Except those cases mentioned 
above, criminal cases subject to the Rule on Summary 
Procedure shall not be referred to mediation. 
 
RULE 117 
MOTION TO QUASH 
 


--- PAGE 101 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
101 
Section 1. Time to move to quash. — At any time 
before entering his plea, the accused may move to 
quash the complaint or information. (1) 
 
Definition 
A motion to quash is defined as a motion requesting 
that a criminal complaint or information be dismissed 
on grounds specified by law or rule. It is an omnibus 
motion.  
 
Purpose 
The designated purpose of a motion to quash is to 
assail the validity of the criminal information for 
defects or defenses apparent on the face of the 
information. (Galzole y Soriaga v. Briones and 
People) 
 
Section 9. Failure to move to quash or to allege any ground 
therefor. — The failure of the accused to assert any 
ground of a motion to quash before he pleads to the 
complaint or information, either because he did not 
file a motion to quash or failed to allege the 
same in said motion, shall be deemed a waiver of 
any objections except those based on the grounds 
provided for in paragraphs (a), (b), (g), and (i) of 
section 3 of this Rule. (8) 
 
Period to file motion to quash an information or 
complaint 
GR: At any time before entering his plea, the accused 
may move to quash the complaint or information. (Sec. 
1, Rule 117) 
XPNs: These grounds may be invoked at any stage of 
the proceedings 
 The facts charged do not constitute an 
offense;  
 Lack of jurisdiction over the offense 
charged; 
 The criminal action or liability has been 
extinguished; and  
 Double Jeopardy. (Sec. 9, Rule 117)  
NOTE: These grounds may be invoked at any stage 
of the proceedings. 
 
Section 3. Grounds. — The accused may move to 
quash the complaint or information on any of the 
following grounds: 
 
(a) That the facts charged do not constitute an 
offense; 
(b) That the court trying the case has no 
jurisdiction over the offense charged; 
(c) That the court trying the case has no jurisdiction 
over the person of the accused; 
(d) That the officer who filed the information had 
no authority to do so; 
(e) That it does not conform substantially to the 
prescribed form; 
(f) That more than one offense is charged except 
when a single punishment for various offenses is 
prescribed by law; 
(g) That the criminal action or liability has been 
extinguished; 
(h) That it contains averments which, if true, would 
constitute a legal excuse or justification; and 
(i) That the accused has been previously 
convicted or acquitted of the offense charged, or 
the case against him was dismissed or otherwise 
terminated without his express consent. (3a) 
 
Effects of the accused’s failure to file a motion to 
quash the complaint or information 
Omnibus motion rule 
1) The ground for quashing the information is 
waived 
Once you already entered your plea, the 
ground of lack of jurisdiction of the court 
over your person shall be deemed waived. 
 
2) The right to object to evidence is waived. 
The action belongs to the accused 
GR: The court or judge cannot, on its own or 
motu proprio, initiate a motion to quash if no 
motion to quash is filed by the accused. A 
motion contemplates an initial action 
originating from the accused. It is the accused 
who is in the best position to know on what 
ground or grounds he will base his 
objection to the information. 
XPN: In the other instances which are not 
waived (4 instances in Section 9, also in certain 
circumstances 3d), the court, if on the face of 
the information or complaint sees that it is 
present, may dismiss the criminal action. 
 
Section 2. Form and contents. — The motion to quash 
shall be in writing, signed by the accused or his 
counsel and shall distinctly specify its factual and 
legal grounds. The court shall consider no ground 
other than those stated in the motion, except lack 
of jurisdiction over the offense charged. (2a) 
 
Application 
Section two clearly implies the requirement of filing a 
motion by the accused, even if the ground asserted 
is premise on lack of jurisdiction over the offense 
charge. Lack of jurisdiction should be evident 
from the face of the information or complaint to 
warrant a dismissal thereof the motion must be signed 
by the accused or his counsel, and shall distinctly 
specify its factual and legal grounds. 
 
Grounds 
a) the facts charged do not constitute an 
offense 
 Whether or not all the elements necessary to 
constitute an offense is present or is found in 
the face of the complaint or information. 
 Whether or not the facts alleged or asservated, 
if hypothetically admitted would establish the 
essential elements of the crime defined in the 
law. 
If you file a motion to quash based on this 
ground, it is assumed or presumed that you 
already hypothetically admit all the allegation or 

--- PAGE 102 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
102 
statement in the complaint or information, but 
that such statement or allegations in the 
complaint or information is not compete to 
charge an offense. 
 
No immediate grant of quashal 
Sec 4.  
xxxIf it is based on the ground that the facts 
charged do not constitute an offense, the 
prosecution shall be given by the court an 
opportunity to correct the defect by amendment. 
The motion shall be granted if the prosecution 
fails to make the amendment, or the complaint 
or information still suffers from the same defect 
despite the amendment. (n) 
 
Even after being given opportunity to correct the 
defect, the prosecution still fails, then the 
complaint or information which still suffers from 
the same defect, despite the amendment shall 
already be ordered quash. 
 
NOTE:  
Ground A Ground B 
The prosecution shall 
be given by the court 
an opportunity to 
correct the defect by 
amendment 
The court may 
consider relevant facts 
aliunde (external evidence) 
 
 
b) That the court trying the case has no 
jurisdiction over the offense charged; 
 jurisdiction over the subject matter 
 territorial jurisdiction 
If the motion to quash is granted, again, the effect 
is that the prosecution can actually refile this 
particular criminal case, because no jeopardy will 
attach so the filing of the criminal case should be in 
the court where there is proper jurisdiction. 
 
c) That the court trying the case has no 
jurisdiction over the person of the accused 
 with or without warrant 
 based on voluntary submission to the 
jurisdiction of the court 
If other grounds are included, then it will be 
deemed as voluntary submission or asking the 
court for relief 
 
d) That the officer who filed the information 
had no authority to do so 
 complaint filed in court involving 
offenses which could not be 
prosecuted de officio such as 
seduction, abduction, acts of 
lasciviousness, adultery, and 
concubinage (ACASA) 
 complaint filed directly with the 
municipal trial court in cases where 
preliminary investigation is not 
required 
 any complaint directly filed to the court 
by the offended party or peace officer 
where the accused is arrested without 
warrant and the inquest prosecutor’s 
absence or unavailable. 
 
Who has authority to file 
1) the offended party,  
2) any peace officer or  
3) other public officers charged with the 
enforcement of the law violated. 
 
Other officers charged with the enforcement of 
law 
1) Members of the Philippine National Police for 
violation of any law ordinance for the 
protection of lives and properties.  
2) Officers or social workers of the Department 
of Social Welfare and Development or the 
barangay chairman for cases of unlawful acts 
committed against children as enumerated 
under Republic Act 7610. Or the special 
protection of children against child abuse, 
exploitation and discrimination.  
3) Forest officers or employees of the Bureau of 
forestry for criminal offenses punish by forest 
loss,  
4) the Internal Revenue officers for violation of 
national Internal Revenue Code and other 
revenue loss administered by the Bureau of 
internal revenue,  
5) customs authority for violation of the tariff and 
customs code and other customs,  
6) law building officials for violations of the 
National Building Code officers  
7) agents of the Philippine Drug Enforcement 
Agency for violations of the comprehensive 
Dangerous Drugs Act.  
8) The law enforcement officers of the 
Department of Agriculture the Philippine 
Navy, Philippine Coast Guard, Philippine 
National Police PNP maritime command law,  
9) enforcement officers of local government units 
and other government enforcement agencies 
for violations of Philippine fisheries code.  
10) other officers that are charged to implement 
certain special laws with penal provisions, for 
example, as SSS law, the revised Corporation 
code, the Securities and Exchange Commission 
as regards the securities regulation code, and 
the like. 
 
other officers which have the authority to file an 
information 
1) the provincial or city prosecutors and their 
assistants under sections three and four of rule 
112,  
2) the chief state prosecutor or now, what is 
called the Prosecutor General under section for 
rule 112.  

--- PAGE 103 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
103 
3) The Ombudsman's or his deputies, the national 
and regional state prosecutors now regional 
prosecutors under Section 3 Rule 112.  
4) The Commission on election legal officers or 
election officers in election cases in special 
counsel designated by the Secretary of justice, 
which are designated to prosecute certain 
offenses. 
 
In a specific and a certain instance where the lack of 
authority of the person filing the information, also 
amounts to lack of jurisdiction of the court over 
the subject matter of the case, the ground of lack 
of authority, will also not be deemed waived even 
if it is not mentioned in the motion to quash or 
alleged in that motion. 
 
e) That it does not conform substantially to 
the prescribed form 
GR: If the information failed to alleged with 
certainty the  
 time of the commission of the offense 
or  
 the name of the accused or name of the 
offended party,  
 the place where the act was committed, 
The accused can either file a  
1) bill of particulars or  
2) a quashal of the information, on the ground 
that it does not conform substantially to the 
prescribed form. 
 
XPN: If the defect in the complaint or 
information can be corrected by amendment 
then the court first must give an opportunity 
for the prosecution to correct the defect 
 
f) That more than one offense is charged 
except when a single punishment for 
various offenses is prescribed by law; 
 
RULE 110 
Section 13. Duplicity of the offense. — A complaint or 
information must charge but one offense, except 
when the law prescribes a single punishment for 
various offenses. (13a) 
 
Duplicitous complaints or information 
Rule 
3) Complaint filed in court – duplicitous 
complaints apply 
4) Complaint filed to the prosecutor’s office - 
duplicitous complaints do not apply 
 
GR: The rule prohibits charging of two or more 
offenses in a single information has for its aim to give 
the defendant the necessary knowledge of the charge 
to enable him to prepare for his defense. The State shall 
not heap upon the defendant two or more charges 
which might confuse him in his defense 
XPN: when the law prescribes a single punishment 
for various offenses such as: 
 Complex crime - a single act constitutes 
two or more grave or less grave felonies or 
when an offense is a necessary means in 
committing the other 
 Compound crime - a single act 
constitutes two or more grave or less 
grave felonies. 
 Complex crime proper - offense is a 
necessary means in the commission of 
the other 
 
 Special complex crime - crimes 
specifically named or designated in special 
penal offenses or under the Revised Penal 
Code all of which are punished with one 
penalty 
 
Special complex 
crime 
Ordinary complex 
crimes 
specifically named or 
designated in special 
penal offenses or 
under the Revised 
Penal Code 
applies specifically to 
felonies defined 
under the Revised 
Penal Code and is 
governed by Article 
48 of the RPC 
 
 Continuous crimes – (delito continuado), 
single larceny doctrine, a series of act 
arising from a single criminal intent. 
 
g) That the criminal action or liability has 
been extinguished; 
The extinguishment of the criminal action or 
the liability already means that the state has lost 
or has waived its right to prosecute an act 
prohibited and punished by law. 
 
Art. 89. How criminal liability is totally extinguished. — 
Criminal liability is totally extinguished: 
1. By the death of the convict, as to the personal 
penalties and as to pecuniary penalties, liability 
therefor is extinguished only when the death of the 
offender occurs before final judgment. 
2. By service of the sentence; 
3. By amnesty, which completely extinguishes the 
penalty and all its effects; 
4. By absolute pardon; 
5. By prescription of the crime; 
6. By prescription of the penalty; 
7. By the marriage of the offended woman, as 
provided in Article 344 of this Code. 
 
Art. 90. Prescription of crime. — Crimes punishable by 
death, reclusion perpetua or reclusion temporal 
shall prescribe in twenty years. 
 
Crimes punishable by other afflictive penalties 
shall prescribe in fifteen years. 
 
Those punishable by a correctional penalty shall 
prescribe in ten years; with the exception of those 
punishable by arresto mayor, which shall prescribe 
in five years. 

--- PAGE 104 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
104 
 
The crime of libel or other similar offenses shall 
prescribe in one year. 
 
The crime of oral defamation and slander by 
deed shall prescribe in six months. 
 
Light offenses prescribe in two months. 
 
When the penalty fixed by law is a compound one, 
the highest penalty shall be made the basis of the 
application of the rules contained in the first, second 
and third paragraphs of this article. (As amended by 
RA 4661, approved June 19, 1966). 
 
Act No. 3326 
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH PERIODS OF 
PRESCRIPTION FOR VIOLATIONS 
PENALIZED BY SPECIAL ACTS AND 
MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES AND TO 
PROVIDE WHEN PRESCRIPTION 
SHALL BEGIN TO RUN 
Section 1. Violations penalized by special acts shall, 
unless otherwise provided in such acts, prescribe in 
accordance with the following rules:  
a) after a year for offenses punished only by 
a fine or by imprisonment for not more 
than one month, or both; (< 1 month) 
b) after four years for those punished by 
imprisonment for more than one month, 
but less than two years; (1 month – 2 years) 
c) after eight years for those punished by 
imprisonment for two years or more, but 
less than six years; and (2-6 years) 
d) after twelve years for any other offense 
punished by imprisonment for six years or 
more, except the crime of treason, which 
shall prescribe after twenty years. 
Violations penalized by municipal 
ordinances shall prescribe after two 
months. (6-20 years), treason – 20, 
municipal ordinances – 2 months 
 
Art. 91. Computation of prescription of offenses. — The 
period of prescription shall commence to run from 
the day on which the crime is discovered by the 
offended party, the authorities, or their agents, 
and shall be interrupted by the filing of the 
complaint or information, and shall commence to 
run again when such proceedings terminate without 
the accused being convicted or acquitted, or are 
unjustifiably stopped for any reason not imputable 
to him. 
 
The term of prescription shall not run when the 
offender is absent from the Philippine Archipelago. 
 
Pardon in private crimes 
RULE: Once the complaint or information is filed in 
court, the control of the proceedings will be subject to 
the discretion of the court. 
 
h) That it contains averments which, if true, 
would constitute a legal excuse or 
justification; 
 The complaint or information already 
contains allegations, which constitute 
legal excuse or justification, and the 
court will not look at any other 
paper, evidence outside the 
complaint or information to decide 
whether or not this ground for a 
motion to quash is present. 
 If an information is filed essentially 
reiterating the same violation, then that 
particular accused can move for the 
quashal and or dismissal of the case 
based on that previous ruling of the 
court case. 
 
Art. 11. Justifying circumstances. — The following do 
not incur any criminal liability: 
  
1) Anyone who acts in defense of his person 
or rights, provided that the following 
circumstances concur; 
 
First. Unlawful aggression. 
Second. Reasonable necessity of the means employed 
to prevent or repel it. 
Third. Lack of sufficient provocation on the part of 
the person defending himself 
 
2) Any one who acts in defense of the person 
or rights of his spouse, ascendants, 
descendants, or legitimate, natural or 
adopted brothers or sisters, or his 
relatives by affinity in the same degrees 
and those consanguinity within the 
fourth civil degree, provided that the first 
and second requisites prescribed in the next 
preceding circumstance are present, and the 
further requisite, in case the revocation was 
given by the person attacked, that the one 
making defense had no part therein. 
3) Anyone who acts in defense of the person 
or rights of a stranger, provided that the 
first and second requisites mentioned in 
the first circumstance of this Art. are 
present and that the person defending be 
not induced by revenge, resentment, or 
other evil motive. 
4) Any person who, in order to avoid an evil 
or injury, does an act which causes damage 
to another, provided that the following 
requisites are present; 
 
First. That the evil sought to be avoided actually 
exists; 
Second. That the injury feared be greater than that 
done to avoid it; 
Third. That there be no other practical and less 
harmful means of preventing it. 
 
5) Any person who acts in the fulfillment of a 
duty or in the lawful exercise of a right or 
office. 
6) Any person who acts in obedience to an 
order issued by a superior for some lawful 
purpose. 

--- PAGE 105 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
105 
 
Art. 12. Circumstances which exempt from criminal liability. 
— the following are exempt from criminal liability: 
1) If the accused is an imbecile or an insane 
person, unless the accused has acted during 
a lucid interval. When the imbecile or insane 
person has committed an act, which the law 
defines as a felony, the court order his 
confinement in one of the hospitals or 
asylums established for persons afflicted 
with insanity, which he shall not be 
permitted to live without the without first 
obtaining the permission of the court.  
2) A person who is under 15 years of age, 
however, the child shall be subjected to an 
intervention program under Republic Act 
9344  
3) A person over 15 years of age and under 
18, unless, if he has acted with 
discernment, shall be exempt. In the case 
of a person acting with discernment, since he 
is not exempt from criminal liability, he shall 
be subjected to appropriate proceedings in 
accordance with the provisions of RA 9344.  
4) Any person who is performing a lawful act 
with due care causes an injury by mere 
accident without fault or intention of 
causing it  
5) Any person who acts under the 
compulsion of an irresistible force or  
6) Any person who acts under the impulse of 
an uncontrollable fear of an equal or 
greater injury, and  
7) Any person who fails to perform an act 
required by law when prevented by some 
lawful or insuperable cause. 
 
Art. 332. Persons exempt from criminal liability. — No 
criminal, but only civil liability, shall result from 
the commission of the crime of theft, swindling or 
malicious mischief committed or caused mutually 
by the following persons: 
1) Spouses, ascendants and descendants, or 
relatives by affinity in the same line. 
2) The widowed spouse with respect to the 
property which belonged to the deceased 
spouse before the same shall have passed 
into the possession of another; and 
3) Brothers and sisters and brothers-in-law and 
sisters-in-law, if living together. 
The exemption established by this article shall not 
be applicable to strangers participating in the 
commission of the crime. 
 
i) That the accused has been previously 
convicted or acquitted of the offense 
charged, or the case against him was 
dismissed or otherwise terminated without 
his express consent 
 
Article III, 1987 Constitution 
SECTION 21. No person shall be twice put in 
jeopardy of punishment for the same offense. If an 
act is punished by a law and an ordinance, conviction 
or acquittal under either shall constitute a bar to 
another prosecution for the same act. 
 
Section 7. Former conviction or acquittal; double jeopardy. 
— When an accused has been convicted or 
acquitted, or the case against him dismissed or 
otherwise terminated without his express 
consent by a court of competent jurisdiction, 
upon a valid complaint or information or other 
formal charge sufficient in form and substance 
to sustain a conviction and after the accused had 
pleaded to the charge, the conviction or acquittal 
of the accused or the dismissal of the case shall be a 
bar to another prosecution for the offense 
charged, or for any attempt to commit the same 
or frustration thereof, or for any offense which 
necessarily includes or is necessarily included in 
the offense charged in the former complaint or 
information. 
 
However, the conviction of the accused shall not be 
a bar to another prosecution for an offense which 
necessarily includes the offense charged in the 
former complaint or information under any of the 
following instances: 
 
(a) the graver offense developed due to 
supervening facts arising from the same act or 
omission constituting the former charge; 
(b) the facts constituting the graver charge became 
known or were discovered only after a plea was 
entered in the former complaint or information; or 
(c) the plea of guilty to the lesser offense was made 
without the consent of the prosecutor and of the 
offended party except as provided in section 1 (f) 
of Rule 116. 
 
In any of the foregoing cases, where the accused 
satisfies or serves in whole or in part the judgment, 
he shall be credited with the same in the event of 
conviction for the graver offense. (7a) 
 
Two-pronged requisites 
1) first jeopardy must have attached prior to the 
second. 
 The accused individual is charged 
under a complaint or information 
sufficient in form in substance to 
sustain his conviction 
Waiver of the objections as to 
sufficiency 
Can sustain a conviction = valid 
information, first jeopardy will attach 
Cannot sustain a conviction = invalid 
information, first jeopardy will not 
attach 
 The court has jurisdiction 
 All proceedings are considered 
null and void 
 The accused had been arraigned and 
had pleaded 
 any defect in the arraignment in 
the plea of the accused which 
will render it invalid whether it 

--- PAGE 106 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
106 
be the fault of the court, the 
prosecution or even the 
accused himself will render the 
arraignment in plea as invalid 
and therefore, the first 
jeopardy will not attach. 
 He is convicted or acquitted, or the 
case was dismissed or otherwise 
terminated without his express 
consent. 
Instances where even with the express 
consent of the accused, it will still be 
considered as a dismissal or 
termination 
if the accused files for a demurrer to 
evidence – considered as acquittal  
in case it is the accused who filed a 
motion to dismiss the case because of 
a violation of his right to a speedy trial 
or a specific speedy disposition of cases 
- considered as acquittal 
 
Finality of Acquittal Doctrine - A judgment of 
acquittal, whether ordered by the trial or the 
appellate court, is final, unappealable, and 
immediately executory upon its promulgation. 
 
2) The first jeopardy must have terminated.  
 No appeal or any other 
proceedings, which will deem 
the case still not final and/or 
executory 
3) the second Jeopardy must be for the same 
offense as the first or the second offense 
includes or is necessarily included in the 
offense charge in the first information or is an 
attempt to commit the same or is a frustration 
thereof. 
 If an act is punished by law, and 
an ordinance, conviction or 
acquittal, under either shall 
constitute a bar to other 
prosecution for the same. 
 
Two recognized tests in determining the existence 
of double jeopardy 
1) Same offense test/identity rule 
2) Same evidence test 
 
Same offense test 
xxxthe conviction or acquittal of the accused or the 
dismissal of the case shall be a bar to another 
prosecution for the offense charged, or for any 
attempt to commit the same or frustration thereof, 
or for any offense which necessarily includes or is 
necessarily included in the offense charged in the 
former complaint or information. 
 
Same offense - identical offense or any attempt or 
commit attempt or frustration to commit the same or 
any offense charged, which necessarily includes or is 
included in the offense charged in the former 
complaint or information. 
 
Same evidence test 
Whether or not a prosecution for one crime constitutes 
an obstacle to a subsequent action for another distinct 
crime, upon the same facts, is to inquire whether the 
facts alleged in the second information, if proven, 
would have been sufficient to support the former 
information of which the accused may have been 
acquitted or convicted, or there is a dismissal without 
the express consent of the accused, subject to certain 
exceptions. Whether or not the same evidence 
supports the two actions. 
 
The test is to inquire whether the two offenses are in 
substance, precisely the same, or of the same nature or 
of the same species so that the evidence which proves 
the one, would prove the other. 
 
Negative tests 
1) A single act may be an offense against two 
statutes. And if each statute requires proof of 
an additional fact, which the other does not, 
then it does not exempt the accused from 
prosecution or conviction under the other. 
2) If the evidence required to convict under the 
first indictment would not be sufficient to 
convict under the second indictment, but 
proof of additional fact would be necessary 
to constitute the offense charge.  
3) unless the two offenses charged are the same 
in law and in fact, they are not the same 
offense. 
 
Instances when conviction is not a bar to another 
prosecution 
1) Supervening facts; 
2) When there are newly discovered facts after a 
plea was entered in the former complaint or 
information; or 
3) When there is an improper plea of guilty to a 
lesser offense 
 
No double may arise 
1) When the accused appeals from the sentence 
 Deemed waived the 
constitutional right of double 
jeopardy 
2) When the civil aspect is appealed 
 Double jeopardy only pertains 
to jeopardy of punishment for 
the same offense. Double 
jeopardy does not pertain to 
the civil aspect of the criminal 
case. 
3) When the action is dismissed with the express 
consent of the accused 
4) When the judgment is considered void 
5) Where the prosecution is denied due process 

--- PAGE 107 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
107 
 it amounts to merely a 
continuation of the first 
Jeopardy and that does not 
expose the accused to a second 
jeopardy. 
6) The discharge of the accused to be a state 
witness 
GR: discharge of an accused to be a state 
witness shall amount to an acquittal and shall 
be a bar to a future prosecution for the same 
offense 
XPN: the accused fails or refuses to testify 
against his co-accused in accordance with his 
sworn statement constituting the basis for the 
discharge. 
 
7) When the trial court commits grave abuse of 
discretion in acquittal 
8) Where the court has no jurisdiction 
9) When the information is defective or is not 
valid 
10) When the two offenses are different 
11) When the case is dismissed on preliminary 
investigation 
 By reason of the abbreviated 
nature of preliminary 
investigation, a dismissal of the 
charge as a result thereof is not 
equivalent to a judicial 
pronouncement of acquittal. 
12) Administrative cases 
13) Appeal of the accused of a judgment of 
conviction 
 
Quasi-offenses 
When you charge a reckless imprudence, a quasi-
offense, reckless imprudence resulting to so and so, a 
valid plea in that connection will already bar 
prosecution of a similar offense which arose from the 
same acts which constituted the first offense. 
 
Where as a result of a vehicular accident, Ivler was 
charged before the MTC with two separate offenses 
in two information. First is reckless imprudence 
resulting in slight physical injuries for injury 
sustained by the victim and reckless imprudence 
resulting in homicide and damage property for the 
death of the victim's husband in the same vehicular 
accident. 
 
When Ivler was convicted in the first quasi-offense, 
it already barred any subsequent prosecution for the 
same quasi-offense, regardless of its various 
resulting acts. (Ivler v. Modesto-San Pedro) 
 
Section 5. Effect of sustaining the motion to quash. — If 
the motion to quash is sustained, the court may 
order that another complaint or information be filed 
except as provided in section 6 of this rule. If the 
order is made, the accused, if in custody, shall not be 
discharged unless admitted to bail. If no order is 
made or if having been made, no new information is 
filed within the time specified in the order or within 
such further time as the court may allow for good 
cause, the accused, if in custody, shall be discharged 
unless he is also in custody for another charge. (5a) 
 
Section 6. Order sustaining the motion to quash not a bar 
to another prosecution; exception. — An order sustaining 
the motion to quash is not a bar to another 
prosecution for the same offense unless the motion 
was based on the grounds specified in section 3 (g) 
and (i) of this Rule. (6a) 
 
GR: if the motion to quash is sustained, meaning it was 
granted by the court, the court may order that another 
complaint or information be filed 
XPN: when it is grounded on double jeopardy or 
extinction of criminal liability. 
 
Effect when order is made 
If the order is made, the accused, if in custody, shall be 
discharged unless he is admitted to bail. 
 
Effect when no order is made 
the accused, if in custody, shall be discharged unless he 
is also in custody for another charge. 
 
Period to make order 
extendable to such further time as the court may allow 
for good cause 
 
Grounds which are not a bar to another prosecution 
(a) That the facts charged do not constitute an offense; 
(b) That the court trying the case has no jurisdiction 
over the offense charged; 
(c) That the court trying the case has no jurisdiction 
over the person of the accused; 
(d) That the officer who filed the information had no 
authority to do so; 
(e) That it does not conform substantially to the 
prescribed form; 
(f) That more than one offense is charged except when 
a single punishment for various offenses is prescribed 
by law; 
(h) That it contains averments which, if true, would 
constitute a legal excuse or justification; and 
 
Section 8. Provisional dismissal. — A case shall not be 
provisionally dismissed except with the express 
consent of the accused and with notice to the 
offended party. 
 
The provisional dismissal of offenses punishable by 
imprisonment not exceeding six (6) years or a fine of 
any amount, or both, shall become permanent one 
(1) year after issuance of the order without the case 
having been revived. With respect to offenses 
punishable by imprisonment of more than six (6) 
years, their provisional dismissal shall become 
permanent two (2) years after issuance of the order 
without the case having been revived. (n) 
 
Section 9. Failure to move to quash or to allege any ground 
therefor. — The failure of the accused to assert any 

--- PAGE 108 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
108 
ground of a motion to quash before he pleads to the 
complaint or information, either because he did not 
file a motion to quash or failed to allege the same in 
said motion, shall be deemed a waiver of any 
objections based on the grounds provided for in 
paragraphs (a), (b), (g), and (i) of section 3 of this 
Rule. (8) 
 
Provisional dismissal 
That dismissal of a criminal action with the express 
consent of the accused and without prejudice to its 
revival within the period prescribed by the rules. 
 
Requisites 
1) The accused must have given express consent 
to the provisional dismissal; 
2) There must be notice to the offended party; 
and  
3) The dismissal must be without prejudice to its 
revival. 
 
When does the provisional dismissal become 
permanent 
1) offenses punishable by imprisonment not 
exceeding six years, or a fine of any amount or 
both – 1 year after issuance of the order, 
without the case being revived 
2) offense punishable by imprisonment of more 
than six years – 2 years after the issuance of 
the order without the case having been revived 
 
If the dismissal is made without notice to the 
offended party, the reglementary period does not 
begin to run. 
 
The time bar rule under Section 8, one year and two 
years, does not reduce the periods under Article 90 
on the prescription of the crime. It is, however, a 
limitation on the right of the state to revive a 
criminal case against the accused after the 
information has been filed but subsequently 
provisionally dismissed with the express consent of 
the accused. 
 
Administrative Matter 12- 11-2-SC  
The Guidelines for Decongesting, Holding 
Jails by Enforcing the Rights of the Accused 
Persons to Bail and to Speedy Trial 
SECTION 10 
A) when the delays are due to the absence of an 
essential witness whose whereabouts are 
unknown or cannot be determined, and therefore 
are subject to exclusion in determining 
compliance with the prescribed time limits which 
cause the trial to exceed 180 days, the court 
shall provisionally dismiss the action with the 
express consent of the detained accuse 
 
B) When the delays are due to the absence of an 
essential witness whose presence cannot be 
obtained by due diligence, though is 
whereabouts are known, the court shall 
provisionally dismiss the action with the 
express consent of the detained accused 
provided that:  
1. The hearing in the case has been previously 
twice postponed due to the non-appearance 
of the essential witness, and both the witness 
and the offended party, if they are two different 
persons, have been given notice of the setting of 
the case for third hearing, which note this contains 
a warning that the case would be dismissed if the 
essential witness continues to be absent.  
2. There is proof of service of the pertinent 
notices of hearings or subpoenas upon the 
essential witness and offended party at their last 
known postal or email addresses or mobile phone 
numbers. 
 
C) For the above purpose, the public or private 
prosecutors shall first present during the trial the 
essential witness or witnesses to the case before 
anyone else. An essential witness is one whose 
testimony dwells on the presence of some or all of 
the elements of the crime, and whose testimony is 
indispensable to the conviction of the accused. 
 
 
essential witness - is one whose testimony dwells on 
the presence of some or all of the elements of the 
crime, and whose testimony is indispensable to the 
conviction of the accused. 
 
GR: The provisional dismissal of a case does not 
operate as an acquittal since its dismissal was made 
with the express consent of the accused. Thus, there 
is no double jeopardy. The state is presumed to have 
abandoned or waived its right to revive the case and 
prosecute the accused. 
 
XPN: if the prosecution actually has a justifiable 
reason for the delay in reviving the case, then the 
court has the discretion to still revive it despite the 
lapse of the period set forth in Sec. 8 that could have 
made the provisional dismissal permanent. 
 
The inordinate delay in the revival or refiling of a 
criminal case may impair or reduce the capacity of 
the state to prove its case with the disappearance or 
non-availability of its witnesses. Physical evidence 
may have been lost, memories of witnesses may have 
grown dim or have faded. Passage of time makes 
proof of any fact more difficult. The accused may 
become a fugitive from justice or commit another 
crime. The longer the lapse of time from the 
dismissal of the case to the revival thereof, the more 
difficult it is to prove the crime.  
 
On the other side of the fulcrum, a mere provisional 
dismissal of a criminal case does not terminate a 
criminal case. And the possibility that the case may 
be revived at any time may disrupt or reduce, if not 
derail the chances of the accused for employment, 
curtail his association, and create anxiety in him and 
his family. He is unable to lead a normal life because 
of community suspicion and his own anxiety. He 
continues to suffer those penalties and disabilities 
incompatible with the presumption of innocence. 
He may also lose his witnesses or other memories 

--- PAGE 109 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
109 
may fade with the passage of time. In the long run, 
it may diminish his capacity to defend himself and 
thus askew the fairness of the entire criminal justice 
system. (People v. Lacson) 
 
Remedy of the accused if motion is denied 
GR: Not subject for petition for certiorari (the motion 
to quash is an interlocutory order) 
XPN: grave abuse of discretion, which amounts to lack 
or excess of jurisdiction of the trial court 
 
RULE 119 
TRIAL 
 
Discovery 
Discovery under the procedure of the modes of 
discovery in civil cases is the procedure by which one 
party in an action is enabled to obtain, before trial, 
knowledge of relevant facts and material evidence 
in the possession of the adverse party or of a 
witness. Its rationale is to enable the parties to obtain 
the fullest possible knowledge of the issues and 
evidence long before the trial to prevent such trial from 
being carried on in the dark. 
 
Modes of discovery in criminal cases 
Sections 12, 13, 15 of RULE 119 and Section 10 of 
RULE 117 
 
Section 12. Application for examination of witness for 
accused before trial. — When the accused has been held 
to answer for an offense, he may, upon motion with 
notice to the other parties, have witnesses 
conditionally examined in his behalf. The motion 
shall state: (a) the name and residence of the 
witness; (b) the substance of his testimony; and (c) 
that the witness is sick or infirm as to afford 
reasonable ground for believing that he will not 
be able to attend the trial, or resides more than 
one hundred (100) kilometers from the place of 
trial and has no means to attend the same, or that 
other similar circumstances exist that would make 
him unavailable or prevent him from attending the 
trial. The motion shall be supported by an affidavit 
of the accused and such other evidence as the court 
may require. (4a) 
 
Formal requirements  
1) a motion;  
2) notice to other parties of the motion.  
3) there should be an affidavit of the accused, 
and such other evidence as the court may 
require to support the application or the 
motion for examination of witness for the 
accused. 
 
Substantive requirements 
1)  The motion shall state the name and 
residence of the witness, in order for the court 
to properly notify the witness that he is being 
called for to be examined as a witness for the 
accused.  
2) In the motion, the substance of the 
testimony of the proposed witness should 
be laid out.  
3) There should be either one or any of these 
reasons in order for the court to consider 
whether or not to grant the application for the 
examination of the witness:  
a) that the witness is sick or infirm;  
b) resides more than one hundred (100) 
kilometers from the place of trial and 
has no means to attend the same, or  
c) that other similar circumstances exist 
that would make him unavailable or 
prevent him from attending the trial. 
 
Section 13. Examination of defense witness; how made. — 
If the court is satisfied that the examination of a 
witness for the accused is necessary, an order will 
be made directing that the witness be examined at a 
specified date, time and place and that a copy of the 
order be served on the prosecutor at least three 
(3) days before the scheduled examination. The 
examination shall be taken before a judge, or, if not 
practicable, a member of the Bar in good 
standing so designated by the judge in the 
order, or if the order be made by a court of superior 
jurisdiction, before an inferior court to be 
designated therein. The examination shall proceed 
notwithstanding the absence of the prosecutor 
provided he was duly notified of the hearing. A 
written record of the testimony shall be taken. (5a) 
 
Section 14. Bail to secure appearance of material witness. 
— When the court is satisfied, upon proof or oath, 
that a material witness will not testify when 
required, it may, upon motion of either party, order 
the witness to post bail in such sum as may be 
deemed proper. Upon refusal to post bail, the court 
shall commit him to prison until he complies or is 
legally discharged after his testimony has been taken. 
(6a) 
 
Section 15. Examination of witness for the prosecution. — 
When it satisfactorily appears that a witness for the 
prosecution is too sick or infirm to appear at the 
trial as directed by the order of the court, or has to 
leave the Philippines with no definite date of 
returning, he may forthwith be conditionally 
examined before the court where the case is 
pending. Such examination, in the presence of the 
accused, or in his absence after reasonable notice to 
attend the examination has been served on him, shall 
be conducted in the same manner as an 
examination at the trial. Failure or refusal of the 
accused to attend the examination after notice shall 
be considered a waiver. The statement taken may be 
admitted in behalf of or against the accused. (7a) 
 
Formal requirements 
1) for the prosecution to apply or to move for the 
conditional examination of their witnesses, 
(MOTION) 
2) and to notify the accused. (NOTIFY) 
 

--- PAGE 110 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
110 
Substantive requirements 
1) the witness of the prosecution is too sick or 
infirm to appear, or  
2) he has to leave the Philippines with no definite 
date of returning. 
 
Examination of 
defense witness 
Examination of 
prosecution witness 
Substantive 
requirements 
4)  The motion shall 
state the name 
and residence of 
the witness, in 
order for the 
court to properly 
notify the witness 
that he is being 
called for to be 
examined as a 
witness for the 
accused.  
5) In the motion, the 
substance of the 
testimony of the 
proposed 
witness should 
be laid out.  
6) There should be 
either one or any 
of these reasons 
in order for the 
court to consider 
whether or not to 
grant the 
application for 
the examination 
of the witness:  
d) that the 
witness is sick 
or infirm;  
e) resides more 
than one 
hundred 
(100) 
kilometers 
from the 
place of trial 
and has no 
means to 
attend the 
same, or  
f) that other 
similar 
circumstances 
exist that 
would make 
him 
unavailable or 
prevent him 
from 
attending the 
trial. 
Substantive 
requirements 
1) the witness of 
the prosecution 
is too sick or 
infirm to 
appear, or  
2) he has to leave 
the Philippines 
with no definite 
date of 
returning. 
 
Formal requirements  
1) a motion;  
Formal requirements 
2) notice to other 
parties of the 
motion.  
3) there should be 
an affidavit of 
the accused, and 
such other 
evidence as the 
court may require 
to support the 
application or the 
motion for 
examination of 
witness for the 
accused. 
1) for the 
prosecution to 
apply or to 
move for the 
conditional 
examination of 
their witnesses, 
(MOTION) 
2) and to notify 
the accused. 
(NOTIFY) 
 
3-day notice rule No express 3-day 
notice rule; it is 
submitted that 
reasonable time would 
be around three days, so 
the accused should be 
notified at least three 
days before the 
examination. 
The examination shall be 
taken before a judge, or, 
if not practicable, a 
member of the Bar in 
good standing so 
designated by the judge 
in the order, or if the 
order be made by a court 
of superior jurisdiction, 
before an inferior court 
to be designated therein. 
should be conducted in 
the same manner as an 
examination at the trial; 
before the judge in 
court 
 
RULE 116 
Section 10. Production or inspection of material evidence in 
possession of prosecution. — Upon motion of the 
accused showing good cause and with notice to 
the parties, the court, in order to prevent surprise, 
suppression, or alteration, may order the 
prosecution to produce and permit the inspection 
and copying or photographing of any written 
statement given by the complainant and other 
witnesses in any investigation of the offense 
conducted by the prosecution or other investigating 
officers, as well as any designated documents, 
papers, books, accounts, letters, photographs, 
objects or tangible things not otherwise privileged, 
which constitute or contain evidence material to any 
matter involved in the case and which are in the 
possession or under the control of the prosecution, 
police, or other law investigating agencies. (11a) 
 
Section 11. Suspension of arraignment. — Upon motion 
by the proper party, the arraignment shall be 
suspended in the following cases: 
 
(a) The accused appears to be suffering from an 
unsound mental condition which effective renders 
him unable to fully understand the charge against 
him and to plead intelligently thereto. In such case, 
the court shall order his mental examination and, if 
necessary, his confinement for such purpose; 

--- PAGE 111 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
111 
(b) There exists a prejudicial question; and 
(c) A petition for review of the resolution of the 
prosecutor is pending at either the Department of 
Justice, or the Office of the President; provided, that 
the period of suspension shall not exceed sixty (60) 
days counted from the filing of the petition with the 
reviewing office. (12a) 
 
Modes of discovery in civil cases 
RULES 23- 28 therein 
 
The modes of discovery under the amended Rules of 
Civil Procedure may be made applicable to the civil 
aspect of that criminal case being handled by the court. 
 
Rule 23 – Deposition Spending actions 
Deposition - is a testimony of a witness taken upon oral 
question or written interrogatories, not in open court, 
but in pursuance of a commission to take testimony 
issued by a court, or under a general law or court rule 
on the subject, and reduced to writing and duly 
authenticated, and intended to be used in preparation 
and upon the trial of a civil or criminal prosecution. It 
is a pretrial discovery device by which one party 
(through his or her attorney) asks oral questions of the 
other party or of a witness for the other party. The 
person who is deposed is called the deponent. The 
deposition is conducted under oath outside of the 
court room, usually in one of the lawyer’s offices. 
 
Rule 24 – Depositions before action or pending appeal 
Rule 25 - details on how parties can elicit material and 
relevant facts through interrogatory 
Rule 26 – admission by a party 
Rule 27 – production or inspection of documents or 
things 
Rule 28 - physical and mental examination of persons 
 
Civil Procedure applies to all actions, whether civil 
or criminal and special proceedings.  
 
While the modes of discovery under the amended 
Rules of Civil Procedure are applied to the civil 
aspect in appropriate cases, in cases where the 
modes of discovery are geared towards 
discovery of evidence and facts as to the 
criminal aspect, then it's the provisions on the 
modes of discovery in Revised Rules of Criminal 
Procedure that will govern. (Vda. de Manguerra v. 
Risos) 
 
The use of discovery procedures is directed to 
the sound discretion of the trial judge, the 
deposition taking cannot be based nor can it be 
denied on flimsy reasons. (People v. Hubert 
Webb) 
 
Section 1. Time to prepare for trial. — After a plea of 
not guilty is entered, the accused shall have at least 
fifteen (15) days to prepare for trial. The trial shall 
commence within thirty (30) days from receipt of 
the pre-trial order. (sec. 6, cir. 38-98) 
 
Trial - judicial examination and determination of 
issues between parties to action, whether they be issues 
of law or of fact before a court that has jurisdiction.  
 
Preparation – 15 days after plea of not guilty 
Commencement – 30 days after pre-trial order 
 
  
Trial in absentia  
After the accused has been arraigned and has entered 
his plea, there can be a trial in absentia, if the accused:  
1) has already been arraigned;  
2) has already been duly notified of the trial; and  
3) his failure to appear is unjustifiable. 
 
Escapee 
When after he has already been arraigned, he escapes, 
he shall be deemed to have waived his right to be 
present on said date and all subsequent trial dates until 
custody of him is redeemed. 
 
Section 2. Continuous trial until terminated; 
postponements. — Trial once commenced shall 
continue from day to day as far as practicable until 
terminated. It may be postponed for a reasonable 
period of time for good cause. (2a) 
 
The court shall, after consultation with the 
prosecutor and defense counsel, set the case for 
continuous trial on a weekly or other short-term trial 
calendar at the earliest possible time so as to ensure 
speedy trial. In no case shall the entire trial period 
exceed one hundred eighty (180) days from the 
first day of trial, except as otherwise authorized 
by the Supreme Court. (sec. 8, cir. 38-98). 
 
The time limitations provided under this section and 
the preceding section shall not apply where special 
laws or circulars of the Supreme Court provide 
for a shorter period of trial. (n) 
 
Postponements 
GR: Motions for postponements are granted only 
upon meritorious grounds, and no party has the right 
to assume that his motion will be granted. 
XPN:  
Good causes 
1) calendar of the court 
2) consideration for clogging of courts 
 
Amendments 
Take note of the time limitation under section 2 
because the trial period has already been presently 
limited to just 80 days under section 6 of Rule 119. For 
drug cases, it should be finished by the court not later 
than 60 days from the date of the filing of the 


--- PAGE 112 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
112 
information based on section 90 of Republic Act 9165 
(The Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002). 
 
Section 3. Exclusions. — The following periods of 
delay shall be excluded in computing the time within 
which trial must commence: 
 
(a) Any period of delay resulting from other 
proceedings concerning the accused, including 
but not limited to the following: 
(1) Delay resulting from an examination of the 
physical and mental condition of the accused; 
(2) Delay resulting from proceedings with respect to 
other criminal charges against the accused; 
(3) Delay resulting from extraordinary remedies 
against interlocutory orders; 
(4) Delay resulting from pre-trial proceedings; 
provided, that the delay does not exceed thirty (30) 
days; 
(5) Delay resulting from orders of inhibition, or 
proceedings relating to change of venue of cases or 
transfer from other courts; 
(6) Delay resulting from a finding of the existence of 
a prejudicial question; and 
(7) Delay reasonably attributable to any period, not 
exceed thirty (30) days, during which any proceeding 
which any proceeding concerning the accused is 
actually under advisement. 
 
(b) Any period of delay resulting from the absence 
or unavailability of an essential witness. 
 
For purposes of this subparagraph, an essential 
witness shall be considered absent when his 
whereabouts are unknown or his whereabouts 
cannot be determined by due diligence. He shall be 
considered unavailable whenever his whereabouts 
are known but his presence for trial cannot be 
obtained by due diligence. 
 
(c) Any period of delay resulting from the mental 
incompetence or physical inability of the accused to 
stand trial. 
 
(d) If the information is dismissed upon motion of 
the prosecution and thereafter a charge is filed 
against the accused for the same offense, any period 
of delay from the date the charge was dismissed to 
the date the time limitation would commence to run 
as to the subsequent charge had there been no 
previous charge. 
 
(e) A reasonable period of delay when the accused is 
joined for trial with a co-accused over whom the 
court has not acquired jurisdiction, or, as to whom 
the time for trial has not run and no motion for 
separate trial has been granted. 
 
(f) Any period of delay resulting from a continuance 
granted by any court motu proprio, or on motion of 
either the accused or his counsel, or the prosecution, 
if the court granted the continuance on the basis of 
its findings set forth in the order that the ends of 
justice served by taking such action outweigh the 
best interest of the public and the accused in a 
speedy trial. (sec. 9, cir. 38-98) 
 
a) Any period of delay resulting from other 
proceedings concerning the accused, including 
but not limited to the following: 
(1) Delay resulting from an examination of the 
physical and mental condition of the accused; 
 
(a) Any period of delay resulting from other 
proceedings concerning the accused, including 
but not limited to the following: 
(2) Delay resulting from proceedings with respect to 
other criminal charges against the accused; 
 
(a) Any period of delay resulting from other 
proceedings concerning the accused, including 
but not limited to the following: 
(3) Delay resulting from extraordinary remedies 
against interlocutory orders; 
 
Interlocutory order - is an order which does not 
dispose of the case on the merits and then when it is 
raised to the appellate court, or to the reviewing court, 
the court issues a temporary restraining order or an 
injunction. 
 
The trial court will have to abide by that order of the 
higher court and the delay in the commencing or in 
proceeding with the trial should be excluded from 
the period to be counted to commence or to finish 
the trial. 
 
(a) Any period of delay resulting from other 
proceedings concerning the accused, including 
but not limited to the following: 
(4) Delay resulting from pre-trial proceedings; 
provided, that the delay does not exceed thirty (30) 
days; 
 
(a) Any period of delay resulting from other 
proceedings concerning the accused, including 
but not limited to the following: 
(5) Delay resulting from orders of inhibition, or 
proceedings relating to change of venue of cases 
or transfer from other courts; 
 
(a) Any period of delay resulting from other 
proceedings concerning the accused, including 
but not limited to the following: 
(6) Delay resulting from a finding of the existence 
of a prejudicial question; and 
 
(a) Any period of delay resulting from other 
proceedings concerning the accused, including 
but not limited to the following: 
(7) Delay reasonably attributable to any period, not 
exceed thirty (30) days, during which any 
proceeding concerning the accused is actually 
under advisement. 
 
(b) Any period of delay resulting from the absence 
or unavailability of an essential witness. 
 
For purposes of this subparagraph, an essential 
witness shall be considered absent when his 

--- PAGE 113 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
113 
whereabouts are unknown or his whereabouts 
cannot be determined by due diligence. He shall be 
considered unavailable whenever his whereabouts 
are known but his presence for trial cannot be 
obtained by due diligence. 
 
Requisites on absence of witness 
1) The witness is really material or essential and 
appears to the court to be so. 
2) That there be that the party who applies for 
postponement has not been guilty of 
neglect. 
3) That the witness can be had at the time to 
which the trial has been deferred 
4) That no similar evidence could be obtained. 
 
(c) Any period of delay resulting from the mental 
incompetence or physical inability of the accused to 
stand trial. 
 
(d) If the information is dismissed upon motion of 
the prosecution and thereafter a charge is filed 
against the accused for the same offense, any period 
of delay from the date the charge was dismissed to 
the date the time limitation would commence to run 
as to the subsequent charge had there been no 
previous charge. 
 
(e) A reasonable period of delay when the accused is 
joined for trial with a co-accused over whom the 
court has not acquired jurisdiction, or, as to 
whom the time for trial has not run and no motion 
for separate trial has been granted. 
 
(f) Any period of delay resulting from a 
continuance granted by any court motu proprio, 
or on motion of either the accused or his 
counsel, or the prosecution, if the court granted 
the continuance on the basis of its findings set forth 
in the order that the ends of justice served by taking 
such action outweigh the best interest of the public 
and the accused in a speedy trial. (sec. 9, cir. 38-98) 
 
Section 4. Factors for granting continuance. — The 
following factors, among others, shall be considered 
by a court in determining whether to grant a 
continuance under section 3(f) of this Rule. 
 
(a) Whether or not the failure to grant a continuance 
in the proceeding would likely make a 
continuation of such proceeding impossible or 
result in a miscarriage of justice; and 
(b) Whether or not the case taken as a whole is so 
novel, unusual and complex, due to the number 
of accused or the nature of the prosecution, or 
that it is unreasonable to expect adequate 
preparation within the periods of time 
established therein. 
 
In addition, no continuance under section 3(f) of this 
Rule shall be granted because of congestion of the 
court's calendar or lack of diligent preparation or 
failure to obtain available witnesses on the part of 
the prosecutor. (sec. 10, cir. 38-98) 
 
Revised Guidelines 
(d) Motion for postponement – A motion for 
postponement is prohibited, except if it is based on 
acts of God, force majeure or physical inability of the 
witness to appear and testify. If the motion is granted 
based on such exceptions, the moving party shall be 
warned that the presentation of its evidence must still 
be finished on the dates previously agreed upon. 
 
REVISED GUIDELINES ON CONTINUOUS 
TRIAL FOR CRIMINAL CASES 
11. Form of testimony 
First level courts - duly subscribed written 
statements given to law enforcers or peace officers 
where the affidavits or counter-affidavits are submitted 
before the investigating prosecutor. If such are not 
available, it shall be in the form of judicial affidavit 
subject to additional to direct and cross-examination. 
 
subscribed written statements > affidavits > judicial 
affidavits 
 
Second level courts - all criminal cases where the 
demeanor of the witness is not essential in 
determining the credibility of witnesses, may be 
written 
- duly subscribed written statements given to law 
enforcers or peace officers where the affidavits or 
counter-affidavits are submitted before the 
investigating prosecutor. If such are not available, it 
shall be in the form of judicial affidavit subject to 
additional to direct and cross-examination. 
XPN: if the court determines that an eyewitness has to 
testify and the court needs to see his demeanor to 
determine his credibility, then the direct testimony 
and the cross-examination of that witness shall be 
in open court and in oral form. 
 
Section 5. Time limit following an order for new trial. — 
If the accused is to be tried again pursuant to an 
order for a new trial, the trial shall commence 
within thirty (30) days from notice of the order, 
provided that if the period becomes impractical due 
to unavailability of witnesses and other factors, the 
court may extend it but not to exceed one hundred 
eighty (180) days from notice of said order for a new 
trial. (sec. 11, cir. 38-98) 
 
Grounds for new trial 
1) Errors of law are irregularities prejudicial to the 
substantial rights of the accused has been 
committed during the trial.  
2) New and material evidence have been 
discovered which the accused could not, with 
reasonable diligence, have discovered and 
produced during the trial which when 
introduced would probably change the 
judgement. 
 
Section 6. Extended time limit. — Notwithstanding 
the provisions of section 1(g), Rule 116 and the 
preceding section 1, for the first twelve-calendar-

--- PAGE 114 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
114 
month period following its effectivity on 
September 15, 1998, the time limit with respect to 
the period from arraignment to trial imposed by said 
provision shall be one hundred eighty (180) days. 
For the second twelve-month period, the limit shall 
be one hundred twenty (120) days, and for the third 
twelve-month period, the time limit shall be eighty 
(80) days. (sec. 7, cir. 38-98) 
 
Section 7. Public attorney's duties where accused is 
imprisoned. — If the public attorney assigned to 
defend a person charged with a crime knows that 
the latter is preventively detained, either because 
he is charged with a bailable crime but has no 
means to post bail, or, is charged with a non-
bailable crime, or, is serving a term of 
imprisonment in any penal institution, it shall be 
his duty to do the following: 
 
(a) Shall promptly undertake to obtain the presence 
of the prisoner for trial or cause a notice to be served 
on the person having custody of the prisoner 
requiring such person to so advise the prisoner of 
his right to demand trial. 
(b) Upon receipt of that notice, the custodian of the 
prisoner shall promptly advise the prisoner of the 
charge and of his right to demand trial. If at anytime 
thereafter the prisoner informs his custodian that he 
demands such trial, the latter shall cause notice to 
that effect to sent promptly to the public attorney. 
(c) Upon receipt of such notice, the public attorney 
shall promptly seek to obtain the presence of the 
prisoner for trial. 
(d) When the custodian of the prisoner receives 
from the public attorney a properly supported 
request for the availability of the prisoner for 
purposes of trial, the prisoner shall be made available 
accordingly. (sec. 12, cir. 38-98) 
 
This rule just iterates the responsibility or the duty of 
the public attorney, to inform and of course, to assist 
the person accused of a crime to demand for trial. 
 
Section 8. Sanctions. — In any case in which private 
counsel for the accused, the public attorney, or the 
prosecutor. 
 
(a) Knowingly allows the case to be set for trial 
without disclosing that a necessary witness would 
be unavailable for trial; 
(b) Files a motion solely for delay which he knows 
is totally frivolous and without merit; 
(c) Makes a statement for the purpose of obtaining 
continuance which he knows to be false and 
which is material to the granting of a 
continuance; or 
(d) Willfully fails to proceed to trial without 
justification consistent with the provisions hereof, 
the court may punish such counsel, attorney, or 
prosecution, as follows: 
 
(1) By imposing on a counsel privately retained in 
connection with the defense of an accused, a fine 
not exceeding twenty thousand pesos 
(P20,000.00); 
(2) By imposing on any appointed counsel de 
oficio, public attorney, or prosecutor a fine not 
exceeding five thousand pesos (P5,000.00); and 
(3) By denying any defense counsel or prosecutor the 
right to practice before the court trying the case 
for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. The 
punishment provided for by this section shall be 
without prejudice to any appropriate criminal 
action or other sanction authorized under these 
rules. (sec. 13, cir. 38-98) 
 
Section 9. Remedy where accused is not brought to trial 
within the time limit. — If the accused is not brought 
to trial within the time limit required by Section 1(g), 
Rule 116 and Section 1, as extended by Section 6 of 
this rule, the information may be dismissed on 
motion of the accused on the ground of denial 
of his right of speedy trial. The accused shall have 
the burden of proving the motion but the 
prosecution shall have the burden of going forward 
with the evidence to establish the exclusion of time 
under section 3 of this rule. The dismissal shall be 
subject to the rules on double jeopardy. 
 
Failure of the accused to move for dismissal prior to 
trial shall constitute a waiver of the right to 
dismiss under this section. (sec. 14, cir. 38-98) 
 
If the case is dismissed, it will be immediately final and 
executory and the first jeopardy will attach that if you 
will file the same criminal case, double jeopardy will 
arise. 
 
Burden of proof 
Accused - burden of proving the motion for dismissal 
Prosecution - burden of going forward with the 
evidence to establish the exclusion of time under 
section 3 of Rule 119 
 
Effect of failure of the accused to move for 
dismissal 
Shall constitute a waiver of the right to dismiss under 
this Section 
 
Section 10. Law on speedy trial not a bar to provision on 
speedy trial in the Constitution. — No provision of law 
on speedy trial and no rule implementing the same 
shall be interpreted as a bar to any charge of denial 
of the right to speedy trial guaranteed by section 
14(2), article III, of the 1987 Constitution. (sec. 15, 
cir. 38-98) 
 
Speedy trial - one conducted according to law, 
criminal procedure, and rules and regulations free from 
vexatious, capricious and oppressive delays. 
 
The invocation of the statutory right to speedy trial 
shall not be interpreted as a bar charge of denial of the 
constitutional right to speedy trial. 
 
Effect of the violation of the right to speedy trial  
if the accused is not brought to trial within the time 
limit, the complaint or information may be dismissed 

--- PAGE 115 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
115 
on motion of the accused on the grounds of denial of 
his right to speedy trial. 
 
Unjustified postponements 
Unjustified postponements, which prolong the trial for 
an unreasonable length of time, are what offend the 
right of the accused to speedy trial. The right to speedy 
trial allows reasonable continuance so as not to deprive 
the prosecution of its day in court. 
 
Balancing test – The test is done by counting the 
delay from the time of the filing of the information 
and the conduct of both the prosecution and the 
accused is weighed and the ff factors are considered: 
1) The length of delay 
2) Reason for the delay – most important 
3) Assertion or non-assertion of the right 
to speedy trial 
4) The prejudice that it has caused the 
accused on the delay 
 
The right to speedy trial may be raised at different 
times in the criminal proceedings 
So long as in these different times, there are different 
reasons. 
 
The Ombudsman procedures are now excluded 
from the computation of the length of delay 
Subsequently, the Supreme Court promulgated a 
jurisprudence which states that the period of 
preliminary examination/preliminary investigation in 
the Ombudsman cannot be taken into account in 
determining the length of delay of a particular criminal 
case. 
 
Section 11. Order of trial. — The trial shall proceed 
in the following order: 
 
(a) The prosecution shall present evidence to 
prove the charge and, in the proper case, the civil 
liability. 
(b) The accused may present evidence to prove 
his defense, and damages, if any, arising from the 
issuance of a provisional remedy in the case. 
(c) The prosecution and the defense may, in that 
order, present rebuttal and sur-rebuttal evidence 
unless the court, in furtherance of justice, permits 
them to present additional evidence bearing upon 
the main issue. 
(d) Upon admission of the evidence of the parties, 
the case shall be deemed submitted for decision 
unless the court directs them to argue orally or 
to submit written memoranda. 
(e) When the accused admits the act or omission 
charged in the complaint or information but 
interposes a lawful defense, the order of trial may 
be modified. (3a) 
 
In asking provisional remedies, usually the order of trial 
will not be followed. 
 
RULE 127 
Section 1. Availability of provisional remedies. — 
The provisional remedies in civil actions, insofar as 
they are applicable, may be availed of in connection 
with the civil action deemed instituted with the 
criminal action. (1a) 
 
A party is required to make his or her oral offer of 
evidence on the same day after the presentation of his 
or her last witness and the opposing party is required 
to immediately interpose his or her oral comment or 
objection thereto. 
 
Written memoranda 
In case the court directs them to file a written 
memoranda, the court will usually give the parties a 
timeframe. It would either be 15 days  
1) from notice, or  
2) from the time the last witness or last hearing  
 
Oral argument 
usually after the hearing of the oral arguments 
 
Reverse trial order 
 not mandatory 
 defense will present evidence first 
 court has the discretion 
 
Provisional remedies 
RULE 127 
Section 2. Attachment. — When the civil action is 
properly instituted in the criminal action as provided 
in Rule 111, the offended party may have the 
property of the accused attached as security for 
the satisfaction of any judgment that may be 
recovered from the accused in the following cases: 
 
(a) When the accused is about to abscond from the 
Philippines; 
(b) When the criminal action is based on a claim 
for money or property embezzled or 
fraudulently misapplied or converted to the use 
of the accused who is a public officer, officer of a 
corporation, attorney, factor, broker, agent, or clerk, 
in the course of his employment as such, or by any 
other person in a fiduciary capacity, or for a willful 
violation of duty; 
(c) When the accused has concealed, removed, or 
disposed of his property, or is about to do so; and 
(d)When the accused resides outside the 
Philippines. (2a) 
 
* since this provisional remedies will be in relation to 
the civil aspect, if it is not deemed instituted in the 
criminal case, then you cannot avail of the provisional 
remedies* 
 
Bail hearing 
Section 8. The evidence presented during the bail 
hearing shall be considered automatically 
reproduced at the trial. But upon motion of either 
party, the court may recall any witness for 
additional examination unless the latter is dead 

--- PAGE 116 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
116 
outside the Philippines or otherwise unable to 
testify. 
 
Counterclaim, cross-claim or third-party 
complaint 
No counterclaim, cross-claim or third-party 
complaint may be filed by the accused in the criminal 
case, but any cause of action which could have been 
the subject thereof may be litigated in a separate civil 
action. 
 
Non-inclusion of eyewitnesses 
The non-inclusion of some of the names of the 
eyewitnesses in the information does not preclude the 
prosecutor from presenting them during trial. The 
enumeration of witnesses in the information is not 
necessarily exhaustive. It is not meant to absolutely 
limit or lessen the prerogative of the prosecutor, 
prosecutor 
 
Participation of the judge during the trial 
Judges have as much interest as counsel in the orderly 
and expeditious presentation of evidence and have the 
duty to ask questions that would elicit the facts and the 
issues involved, clarify ambiguous remarks by 
witnesses and address the points that are overlooked 
by counsel. 
 
Our system is more of accusatory rather than 
inquisitorial. However, the questioning by the judge is 
not in any way and move to an inquisitorial form, it is 
merely to make sure that facts are clarified. He is 
allowed a reasonable leeway in putting questions to 
witnesses as may be essential to elicit relevant facts to 
make the record speak the truth. 
 
Section 16. Trial of several accused. — When two or 
more accused are jointly charged with any offense, 
they shall be tried jointly unless the court, in its 
discretion and upon motion of the prosecutor or any 
accused, orders separate trial for one or more 
accused. (8a) 
 
Rules 
1) When two or more accused or jointly charged 
in any offense, joint trial is automatic without 
need of any court order. 
2) Court may, in its discretion and upon motion 
of the prosecutor or any accused, orders 
separate trial for one or more accused. 
3) Court may grant a separate trial for those 
persons where the court has already acquired 
jurisdiction over their person. 
4) If it appears that several accused have different 
defenses, which may be antagonistic to 
each other, in the interest of justice, a separate 
trial may be granted even after the prosecution 
has finished presenting its evidence in chief. 
5) The grant or denial of a separate trial is 
discretionary upon the court and will be based 
on the circumstances of each case. 
 
Section 17. Discharge of accused to be state witness. — 
When two or more persons are jointly charged with 
the commission of any offense, upon motion of the 
prosecution before resting its case, the court may 
direct one or more of the accused to be discharged 
with their consent so that they may be witnesses for 
the state when, after requiring the prosecution to 
present evidence and the sworn statement of each 
proposed state witness at a hearing in support of the 
discharge, the court is satisfied that: 
 
(a) There is absolute necessity for the testimony 
of the accused whose discharge is requested; 
(b) The is no other direct evidence available for 
the proper prosecution of the offense committed, 
except the testimony of said accused; 
(c) The testimony of said accused can be 
substantially corroborated in its material points; 
(d) Said accused does not appear to be the most 
guilty; and 
(e) Said accused has not at any time been 
convicted of any offense involving moral 
turpitude. 
 
Evidence adduced in support of the discharge shall 
automatically form part of the trial. If the court 
denies the motion for discharge of the accused as 
state witness, his sworn statement shall be 
inadmissible in evidence. (9a) 
 
Modes of becoming a state witness 
1) Either the discharge under Section 17,  
2) By the approval of the application for 
admission into the witness protection program 
of the Department of Justice in accordance 
with Republic Act 6981. 
 
* the determination of who should be under the 
witness protection program and who should be 
discharged as witness will be the discretion of the 
prosecution. 
*whether to discharge or not is discretionary upon the court 
*the determination of who comes under the witness 
protection program solely will be with the DOJ 
 
Discharge hearing, exception 
1) If already a witness of the state under the 
witness protection program, then the provision 
of Section 17 Rule 119 will no longer apply. 
2) Where after the filing of the case in court, it 
was determined that one is a qualified person 
to be in the witness protection program. Aside 
from complying with the witness protection 
program under Republic Act 6981, Section 17 
must also be complied. 
 
Q: Is it possible that two witnesses or two accused, 
maybe discharge a state witness? 
A: Yes, so long as the factors that are provided under 
Section 17 are present. 
 
Section 18. Discharge of accused operates as acquittal. — 
The order indicated in the preceding section shall 

--- PAGE 117 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
117 
amount to an acquittal of the discharged accused 
and shall be a bar to future prosecution for the 
same offense, unless the accused fails or refuses 
to testify against his co-accused in accordance 
with his sworn statement constituting the basis 
for the discharge. (10a) 
 
Section 19. When mistake has been made in charging the 
proper offense. — When it becomes manifest at any 
time before judgment that a mistake has been 
made in charging the proper offense and the 
accused cannot be convicted of the offense 
charged or any other offense necessarily 
included therein, the accused shall not be 
discharged if there appears good cause to detain 
him. In such case, the court shall commit the 
accused to answer for the proper offense and 
dismiss the original case upon the filing of the 
proper information. (11a) 
 
Application 
This applies when the offense proved is different from 
the offense charged. And such offense proved is not 
necessarily included in the offense charged. 
 
Section 20. Appointment of acting prosecutor. — When 
a prosecutor, his assistant or deputy is disqualified to 
act due to any of the grounds stated in section 1 of 
Rule 137 or for any other reasons, the judge or the 
prosecutor shall communicate with the Secretary of 
Justice in order that the latter may appoint an acting 
prosecutor. (12a) 
 
RULE 137 
Section 1. Disqualification of judges. — No judge or 
judicial officer shall sit in any case in which he, or his 
wife or child, is pecuniarily interested as heir, legatee, 
creditor or otherwise, or in which he is related to 
either party within the sixth degree of consanguinity 
or affinity, or to counsel within the fourth degree, 
computed according to the rules of the civil law, or 
in which he has been executor, administrator, 
guardian, trustee or counsel, or in which he has been 
presided in any inferior court when his ruling or 
decision is the subject of review, without the written 
consent of all parties in interest, signed by them and 
entered upon the record.  
 
A judge may, in the exercise of his sound discretion, 
disqualify himself from sitting in a case, for just or 
valid reasons other than those mentioned above. 
 
Section 21. Exclusion of the public. — The judge may, 
motu proprio, exclude the public from the courtroom 
if the evidence to be produced during the trial is 
offensive to decency or public morals. He may also, 
on motion of the accused, exclude the public from 
the trial, except court personnel and the counsel 
of the parties. (13a) 
 
1) Court, motu proprio - exclude the public 
from the courtroom if the evidence to be 
produced during the trial is offensive to 
decency or public morals. 
2) On motion of accused - exclude the public 
from the trial, except court personnel and the 
counsel of the parties. 
 
 
Section 22. Consolidation of trials of related offenses. — 
Charges for offenses founded on the same facts or 
forming part of a series of offenses of similar 
character may be tried jointly at the discretion of 
the court. (14a) 
 
Consolidation - the act or process of uniting several 
actions into one trial or judgment by order of the 
Court where all actions are between the same parties 
pending in the same court and involving substantially 
the same issues and defenses or the court may order 
that one of the actions be tried and the other be 
decided without trial according to the judgment in the 
one selected. The purpose of consolidation is to avoid 
multiplicity of suits, guards against oppression or 
abuse, prevent delay, clear congested docket and 
simplify the work of the trial court and save 
unnecessary cost or expense. In short, the attainment 
of justice with the least expense and vexation to the 
parties and litigants. 
 
When there is duty to consolidate 
When two crimes charged in the information filed 
before two different courts where irrefutably linked 
with or related to one another as they arose from the 
same incident and were founded on the same factual 
milieu and would be proven by the same testimony of 
the same witnesses, it was held that those cases should 
have been consolidated and jointly tried in one 
branch of the court. 
 
Section 23. Demurrer to evidence. — After the 
prosecution rests its case, the court may dismiss 
the action on the ground of insufficiency of 
evidence  
(1) on its own initiative after giving the prosecution 
the opportunity to be heard or  
(2) upon demurrer to evidence filed by the 
accused with or without leave of court. 
 
If the court denies the demurrer to evidence filed 
with leave of court, the accused may adduce 
evidence in his defense. When the demurrer to 
evidence is filed without leave of court, the 
accused waives the right to present evidence and 
submits the case for judgment on the basis of the 
evidence for the prosecution. (15a) 
 
The motion for leave of court to file demurrer to 
evidence shall specifically state its grounds and 
shall be filed within a non-extendible period of five 
(5) days after the prosecution rests its case. The 
prosecution may oppose the motion within a non-
extendible period of five (5) days from its 
receipt. 
 
If leave of court is granted, the accused shall file 
the demurrer to evidence within a non-extendible 

--- PAGE 118 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
118 
period of ten (10) days from notice. The 
prosecution may oppose the demurrer to evidence 
within a similar period from its receipt. 
 
The order denying the motion for leave of court to 
file demurrer to evidence or the demurrer itself shall 
not be reviewable by appeal or by certiorari 
before judgment. (n) 
 
Demurrer to evidence 
An objection by one of the parties in an action to the 
effect that the evidence, which his adversary produce 
is insufficient in point of law, whether true or not to 
make out a case or sustained the issue. The party the 
emerging challenges the sufficiency of the whole 
evidence to sustain a verdict. 
 
A demurrer to evidence is actually a motion to dismiss 
that is filed by the accused after the prosecution has 
rested its case. Thus, demurrer to evidence file before 
the prosecution rested its case is premature. 
 
When considered sufficient 
Evidence must prove 
1) the commission of the crime and  
2) the precise degree of participation there in 
by the accused. 
 
Leave of court 
A legal term used to describe asking the court 
permission to do something that the court doesn’t 
normally allow according to its rules and procedures. 
Either party can file this motion, which is often called 
a motion for leave. 
 
Effect of leave of court 
1) demurrer with leave of court - If the court 
denies the demurrer to evidence filed with 
leave of court, the accused may adduce 
evidence in his defense. 
2) demurrer without leave of court - When the 
demurrer to evidence is filed without leave of 
court, the accused waives the right to present 
evidence and submits the case for judgment on 
the basis of the evidence for the prosecution. 
 
Period 
1) Motion for leave of court - non-extendible 
period of five (5) days after the prosecution 
rests its case. The prosecution may oppose 
the motion within a non-extendible period 
of five (5) days from its receipt. 
2) Demurrer to evidence - non-extendible 
period of ten (10) days from notice. The 
prosecution may oppose the demurrer to 
evidence within a similar period from its 
receipt. 
 
Q: What is the effect of a lack of formal offer of 
evidence during trial? 
A: documents, which may have been identified and 
marked as exhibits during the pre-trial or trial, but 
which were not formally offered in evidence cannot in 
any manner be treated as evidence. 
 
When rule of offer of evidence is relaxed 
1) the evidence was duly identified by the 
testimony duly recorded.  
2) the evidence was incorporated in the records of 
the case 
 
Based on evidence of the prosecution 
Although a demurrer to evidence must be resolved 
based on the evidence of the prosecution. There is 
nothing in the rules which would bar the court from 
taking cognizance of any other matters taken up during 
the trial or which has become part of the records of the 
case. 
 
Q: What this is a remedy against a denial of a 
demurrer? 
A: The appropriate recourse from an order denying a 
demurrer to evidence is for the court to  
1) proceed with the trial,  
2) after which the accused may file an appeal from 
the judgment of the lower court rendered after 
such trial.  
 
When such an adverse interrogatory order is rendered, 
the remedy is in absence of grave abuse of 
discretion or excess of jurisdiction, or an 
oppressive exercise of judicial authority, not to 
resort to certiorari or prohibition but to continue with 
the case in due course, and when an unfair 
favorable verdict is handed down to take an appeal 
in the manner authorized by law. 
 
1) With leave of court - present his evidence and 
thereafter take an appeal from the judgment of 
conviction 
2) Without leave of court - may interpose an 
appeal from the judgment of conviction 
rendered by the trial court after the denial of 
his demurrer. 
 
The rule generally prevailing is that certiorari does not 
lie to review a trial court's interlocutory order denying 
a demurrer to evidence. 
 
Q: What if the demurrer to evidence is filed by one 
of several accused? 
A: When one of several accused files a demurrer to 
evidence with leave of court. It is sound practice for 
the trial court to resolve the demurrer to evidence 
before proceeding with a trial for the other accused. 
The rationale for this is that the accused filing of the 
demurrer does not waive his right to present this 
evidence in the event of the denial of his demurrer. 
 
Section 24. Reopening. — At any time before finality 
of the judgment of conviction, the judge may, 
motu proprio or upon motion, with hearing in 
either case, reopen the proceedings to avoid a 

--- PAGE 119 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
119 
miscarriage of justice. The proceedings shall be 
terminated within thirty (30) days from the order 
grating it. (n) 
 
Reopening of a case - one to permit the introduction 
of new evidence and practically to permit a new trial. 
 
Period 
Any time before the judgment of conviction becomes 
final. This presupposes a situation where the judgment 
has been promulgated in the proceedings shall be 
terminated within 30 days from the order granting the 
reopening. 
 
Who may file 
1) May be filed by either party 
2) The reopening based on the rules may also be 
made at the instance of the court. But in any 
case, there must be a hearing conducted for the 
purpose of determining the propriety of such 
reopening. 
3) A case may be open before the rendition of 
judgment without the consent of the 
accused. 
 
Motion for new trial Motion for reopening 
may only be filed by the 
accused or granted with 
his consent 
May be had on the 
motion by either party or 
motu proprio by the 
court. 
governed by Rule 121 of 
the Rules 
governed by Section 24, 
Rule 119 
may be applied for and 
granted only upon 
specific well-defined 
grounds, 
controlled by no other 
rule than that of the 
paramount interests of 
justice, that is to avoid a 
miscarriage of justice. 
 
RULE 120 
JUDGMENT 
 
Section 1. Judgment definition and form. — Judgment is 
the adjudication by the court that the accused is 
guilty or not guilty of the offense charged and the 
imposition on him of the proper penalty and civil 
liability, if any. It must be written in the official 
language, personally and directly prepared by the 
judge and signed by him and shall contain clearly and 
distinctly a statement of the facts and the law upon 
which it is based. (1a) 
 
Judgment - final consideration in determination of a 
court of competent jurisdiction upon the matters 
submitted to it in an action or proceeding. 
 
It is the adjudication by the court that the accused is 
guilty or not guilty of the offense charged and the 
imposition on him of the proper penalty and civil 
liability, if any. 
 
Form 
1) written in the official language 
2) personally and directly prepared by the judge 
and signed by him - To be valid, the judgment 
must be signed and promulgated during the 
incumbency of the judge who signed the same. 
 
The efficacy of the decision or the judgment is not 
necessarily impaired by the fact that the ponente, the 
one who pens the judgment only took over from 
another judge who had earlier presided over the trial, 
for it does not follow that a judge who was not 
present during the trial cannot render a valid and just 
decision. 
 
3) contain clearly and distinctly a statement of the 
facts and the law upon which it is based 
 
Function 
1) to inform the parties of their case, or their 
reasons for the decision so that if any of them 
appeals, he can point out to the appellate court 
the findings of facts or their rulings on points 
of law which he disagrees with. 
2) assurance to the parties that in reaching a 
judgment, the judge did so through the process 
of legal reasoning. 
 
Date of submission 
The 1987 Constitution provides under Section 15 (1), 
Article 8, that unless reduced by the Supreme Court, all 
lower courts other than a collegial court must decide or 
resolve matters within three months from the date of 
submission.  
 
Submission - Upon filing of last pleading 
 
When judgment was rendered beyond the three-
month period 
Those decisions or judgment are valid. However, it will 
be the judges that failed to render the decision within 
that period who will be sanctioned. The rendition of 
the judgment beyond the periods provided for under 
the Constitution will not invalidate the judgment. 
 
Cases under the Rule on Summary Procedure 
30 days following the receipt of the last affidavit 
and position paper or the expiration of the period for 
filing the same within which to render the judgment. 
 
Drug cases 
The decision shall be rendered by the trial court within 
15 days from the date of the submission of the case 
for resolution. 
 
Section 2. Contents of the judgment. — If the judgment 
is of conviction, it shall state  
(1) the legal qualification of the offense 
constituted by the acts committed by the accused 
and the aggravating or mitigating circumstances 
which attended its commission;  
(2) the participation of the accused in the offense, 
whether as principal, accomplice, or accessory after 
the fact;  

--- PAGE 120 ---
  FROM THE ANNOTATIONS OF DEAN TAN AND DISCUSSIONS OF ATTY DERIJE 
 
            Criminal Procedure | VENTEROSO 
120 
(3) the penalty imposed upon the accused; and  
(4) the civil liability or damages caused by his 
wrongful act or omission to be recovered from the 
accused by the offended party, if there is any, unless 
the enforcement of the civil liability by a separate 
civil action has been reserved or waived. 
 
In case the judgment is of acquittal, it shall state 
whether the evidence of the prosecution absolutely 
failed to prove the guilt of the accused or merely 
failed to prove his guilt beyond reasonable doubt. In 
either case, the judgment shall determine if the act 
or omission from which the civil liability might arise 
did not exist. (2a) 
 
Proof beyond reasonable doubt 
To be considered sufficient, evidence must prove:  
1) The commission of the crime; and  
2) The precise degree of the participation of the 
accused therein. 
 
GR: Conviction must be by virtue of direct evidence 
XPN: Supreme Court has pronounced that conviction 
of an accused through circumstantial evidence as long 
as the following requisites or presence may be had:  
(1) That there must be more than one circumstance;  
(2) That the inference must be based on proven facts; 
and  
(3) That the combination of all circumstances 
produces a conviction beyond doubt of the guilt of 
the accused 
 
Proof of minority 
The allegation of minority or age must be proved with equal 
certainty and clearness as the crime itself. 
 
Judgment of acquittal 
In case the judgment is for acquittal, it shall state whether 
the evidence of the prosecution absolutely failed to prove 
the guilt of the accused or merely failed to prove this guilt 
beyond reasonable doubt. In either case, the judgment shall 
determine if the act or omission from which the civil 
liability might arise did not exist. 
 
Two kinds of acquittal 
1) An acquittal on the ground the accused is not the 
author of the act or omission complained of. 
2) An acquittal based on reasonable doubt of the guilt 
of the accused. 
 
Finality of acquittal rule 
A judgment of acquittal is immediately final and executory, 
and it is not appealable. It cannot be reconsidered, nor can 
it be modified, except to eliminate something which is civil 
or administrative in nature, or it can be modified so long as 
it is favorable to the accused. 
 
1) Judgment of conviction – 15 days to appeal 
from the date of promulgation of the judgment 
2) Judgment of acquittal – becomes final and 
executory 
 
Dismissal upon an affidavit of assistance 
GR: An affidavit of desistance by itself, is not a ground for 
the dismissal of a criminal case, after the institution of the 
action. 
 
Motion/Action In 
writing? 
CONSENT SIGN NOTICE 
Motion to quash YES  Accused 
or 
Counsel 
 
Pre-trial YES  Accused 
and 
Counsel 
 
Provisional 
dismissal  
 MUST BE 
EXPRESS; 
Accused 
 Offended 
party 
Judgment YES  Judge  
New trial or 
reconsideration 
YES Accused   
Dismissal of 
appeal 
   Appellant 
 
Motion/Action Considered as 
acquittal? 
Discharge of accused YES 
Demurrer to evidence YES 
Violation of right to 
speedy trial 
YES 
Provisional dismissal NO 
 
Motion/Action Interlocutory? 
Demurrer to evidence YES 
Motion to quash YES 
 
 
 
 
 
