--- PAGE 1 ---
Department of Justice
Manila
027
Republika ng Pilipinas
KAGAWARAN NG KATARUNGAN
DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR NO.- - - ---- -
SUBJECT
DATE
2022 NPS RULE ON APPEAL
JUL132022
In the interest of speedy, efficient, and effective administration of justice,
pursuant to the provisions of existing laws, this Rule on Appeal from rulings of
prosecutors in the National Prosecution Service (NPS) is hereby adopted:
Section 1. The Office of the Secretary of Justice shall review appeals from
resolutions of the Prosecutor General in cases subject to its preliminary investigation
as referred to it by various government agencies, and from resolutions of the
Provincial/City Prosecutors in cases cognizable by the Regional Trial Court.
Section 2. Resolutions of the Provincial/City Prosecutors in cases
cognizable by the Metropolitan Trial Court, Municipal Circuit Trial Court, Municipal
Trial Court, and Municipal Trial Court in Cities shall be reviewed on appeal by the
Prosecutor General in his/her capacity as the Regional State Prosecutor in the
National Capital Region and by the Regional State Prosecutors with respect totheir
respective regions. Cases decided on appeal by the Prosecutor General and by the
Regional State Prosecutors under this provision shall be considered final and no
longer be appealable to the Office of the Secretary of Justice.
Section 3. Notwithstanding the above, the Secretary of Justice reserves the
right toevaluate,in the interest ofjustice,toaffordfair play and prevent the miscarriage
of justice, muto proprio or upon written and signed complaint, any resolution of the
Prosecutor General, Regional State Prosecutors and Provincial/City Prosecutors. This
residual power of review shall conform with the constitutional requirements of due
process and will be covered by a relevant department circular to be issued by the
Office of the Secretary of Justice.
Section 4. There shall be formed a Prosecution Integrity Board to monitor,
audit from time to time and assess the performance of the Prosecutor General,
Regional State Prosecutors and Provincial/City Prosecutors in the conduct of the
preliminary investigation and/or appeal. This shall be covered by a relevant
department circular to be issued by the Office of the Secretary of Justice.
Section 5. This Circular modifies Department Circular No. 70 dated 3 July
2000 and Department Circular No. 70-A, dated 10 July 2000. All provisions of these
two circularsand Department Circular No. No. 18 dated 8 March 2017 not inconsistent
with this Circular shall remain in force and effect.


--- PAGE 2 ---
Section 6. This Circular shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in
two (2) newspapers of general circulation and after copies have been furnished to the
Office of National Administrative Registrar (ONAR), UP Law Center, University of the
Philippines, Diliman, Quezon City. - ­
--- ·--- _,.., ✓ -,
/ lJ- " _ ­
_ SPIN.C. REM_ULb-A
tS__es:retary . -
Department of Justice
CN: 0202207060
1111111111111111111111111111111111111111
2

